Title: A Heterogeneous Neural Network Accelerator for End-to-End Multitask RF Signal Recognition

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.24669v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Jul 2026 02:23:20 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
> 1

# A Heterogeneous Neural Network Accelerator for End-to-End Multitask RF Signal Recognition 

Zhifan Song, Haralampos-G. Stratigopoulos, Member, IEEE , and Hassan Aboushady, Senior Member, IEEE 

Sorbonne University, CNRS, LIP6, Paris, France 

Abstract —This paper presents a heterogeneous neural network accelerator for multi-task RF signal recognition, supporting au-tomatic modulation recognition (AMR), hardware-Trojan covert channel (HT-CC) detection, and GNSS jamming classification. We introduce a compact attention-enhanced convolutional neural network (CNN) combined with LSDec, a learnable streaming decimator that enables adaptive temporal downsampling and flexible input lengths. The hardware architecture integrates a novel dual-pipeline, fused convolution–pooling engine with DMA-based streaming to minimize memory traffic and latency. Co-execution scheduling on the accelerator and SIMD-optimized CPU kernels reduces hardware resource usage while preserving high performance and task-level flexibility. Across three datasets, the proposed system achieves ≥ 99% average accuracy above 4 dB Signal-to-Noise Ratios (SNRs) on the RadioML2018 dataset for AMR, 90% on the HT-CC dataset, and 99.5% on the GNSS-Jamming dataset. The accelerator sustains an end-to-end inference latency of 98 μs per frame, demonstrating its effectiveness for low-power, latency-critical multi-task spectrum-intelligence applications on embedded and edge devices. 

Index Terms —AI Hardware Acceleration, Heterogeneous com-puting, System-on-Chip (SoC), HW-SW Co-Execution, RF Mod-ulation Recognition, FPGA Prototyping. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# THE rapid growth of modern wireless communication systems has intensified pressure on the already congested radio spectrum, resulting in inefficient and uneven frequency band utilization [1]. Emerging 5G networks and the large-scale deployment of Internet of Things (IoT) devices intro-duce dense coexistence of heterogeneous waveforms, dynamic spectrum access, and increasingly complex interference en-vironments. Future 6G networks of ubiquitous intelligence are expected to integrate native AI-driven radio architectures and real-time spectrum cognition [2], [3], requiring embedded devices to rapidly interpret high-rate in-phase/quadrature (I/Q) samples from the RF front-end under strict latency and power constraints, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Software-Defined Radios (SDRs) [3] built on FPGAs/SoCs have emerged as a flexible solution for RF sensing and edge inference, enabling real-time signal processing with tight energy budgets. Within this context, automatic modulation recognition (AMR) is a fundamental step in spectrum in-telligence, enabling wireless nodes to identify signal types prior to demodulation. AMR improves spectrum traffic by removing redundant modulation metadata in the signal, sup-ports opportunistic spectrum access for secondary users during idle intervals, and allows devices to evaluate transmission   

> This work was funded by the Chips JU project Resilient Trust of the EU’s Horizon Europe research and innovation programme under Grant agreement No101112282.
> Fig. 1. End-to-end RF spectrum monitoring system with dedicated AI SoC. LNA: Low-noise amplifier; LPF: Low-pass filter; LO: Local oscillator; ADC: Analog-to-digital converter.

feasibility in the presence of heterogeneous technologies and interference [4]. Beyond AMR, modern RF environments also require ro-bust classification of security-related phenomena, including hardware Trojan–based covert channels (HT-CCs) [5] and intentional interference such as Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) jamming [6]. Traditional methods struggle with accuracy and computational efficiency [7]. Although deep learning models have demonstrated high accuracy across these tasks, most existing solutions rely on GPU evalua-tion or large networks with millions of parameters [8]–[12]. Such approaches incur high latency and energy consumption, making them impractical for embedded SDR platforms or IoT devices. Cloud computing is likewise unsuitable due to RF data volume, privacy concerns, and stringent latency requirements [13]. Low-latency and power-efficient spectrum intelligence at the edge has become a critical requirement for wireless devices. Recent hardware accelerators for AMR [14]–[19] address parts of this challenge, but they typically focus on single-task efficiency, depend on high-end FPGAs, or have relatively high power consumption. These designs implement all layers in hardware, making them inflexible for adapting to new RF tasks or adjusting model hyperparameters without hardware redesign and resynthesis. Moreover, typical devices all have CPUs which may be underutilized. Heterogeneous computing, where different IP cores collab-oratively execute a neural network (NN), has shown strong potential for improving performance and energy efficiency in edge devices [20]. However, to the best of our knowledge, this paradigm has not been explored for AMR or other RF signal classification tasks, particularly on resource-constrained embedded and IoT platforms. Many existing AMR approaches also rely on input prepro-cessing [21]–[24] which not only adds latency but requires arXiv:2607.24669v1 [cs.AR] 27 Jul 2026 2

buffering full-length I/Q signals. Moreover, existing hardware accelerators are customized and mostly proposed for a single RF task, such as AMR [25], which requires re-design and/or re-synthesis when the task changes [26] and often neglects the challenges of interfacing RF front-end ADCs which operate at significantly faster speeds and deploying standard NNs directly at the ADC rate leads to prohibitive power and area. Motivated by these gaps, this work introduces a heterogeneous NN accelerator, as illustrated in Fig. 1, for end-to-end multi-task RF signal recognition without preprocessing, including AMR, HT-CC detection, and GNSS jamming classification. The end-to-end system interfaces directly with an RF front-end: raw I/Q streams are fed directly into a dedicated AI System-on-Chip (SoC) for end-to-end inference. This AI accelerator leverages a heterogeneous architecture to balance computational efficiency with task-level flexibility at the edge. We extend our prior FPGA-only design in [19] with a new algorithm–architecture co-design that enables real-time edge inference on deeply embedded devices. In this paper, we focus on system-level efficiency and flexibility. The main contributions are as follows:  

> •

A compact attention-enhanced integer-quantized NN architecture designed for configurable RF signal classifi-cation, achieving high accuracy across multiple RF tasks while reducing parameter count and computational cost.  

> •

A learnable streaming decimator (LSDec) that bridges the ADC-to-AI Core speed mismatch, enabling decima-tion while performing feature extraction on the fly to meet real-time constraints regardless of input length.  

> •

A dual-pipeline, fused convolution-maxpooling engine 

with DMA-driven data transfer for further latency opti-mization.  

> •

A heterogeneous CPU – NN accelerator framework 

with an algorithm-hardware co-scheduling algorithm and task-aware flexibility, enabling adaptation of model hy-perparameters on a general-purpose CPU to new RF tasks without NN accelerator hardware redesign.  

> •

A unified multi-task RF signal recognition system 

validated on three datasets for AMR [27], HT-CC [5], and jamming [28], supporting processing of streaming I/Q samples at 98 μs with high classification accuracy, demonstrating strong generalizability across spectrum-intelligence and RF-security applications. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. RF Spectrum Monitoring 1) Automatic Modulation Recognition: Deep learning (DL) with NNs has demonstrated superior capability in numerous domains: Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks [29] have shown success with time-series data but suffer from limited parallelization due to sequential structure. Transformer models [30]–[32], though powerful, are generally memory-intensive and less suitable on edge devices. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) offer a better balance, providing high parallelism, reduced memory footprint, and low inference latency, making them a better fit for edge devices [33], [34]. AI-based RF spectrum monitoring has become a dominant trend and models can learn discriminative representations from RF data, ensuring superior detection accuracy [4], [25]. Conventional AMR methods fall broadly into feature-based (FB) and likelihood-based (LB) approaches. LB methods typi-cally achieve strong accuracy at the cost of high computational cost [35]–[37], while FB methods rely on manual feature extraction and classifier design whose effectiveness degrades as modern communication signals grow in modulation order and variability [4], [38]. In DL-based AMR, existing models operate on raw I/Q frames or pre-processed input and transformed representations such as a constellation maps [21], spectrograms [22], time-frequency diagrams [23], amplitude/phase signals [24], etc. The first seminal work is a 4-layer CNN model [39] which demonstrated clear advantages over traditional ML techniques trees and SVM, but it was designed for 128-length input while the model parameters scale significantly for longer I/Q sequences, and it suffers from limited accuracy [25] on more challenging over-the-air signals [27]. Recurrent architectures excel in time-series processing and have also been explored. An LSTM [8] with amplitude/phase-transformed input yields high accuracy but incurs substantial computational cost. A lightweight LSTM autoencoder [24] was proposed and targeted resource-constrained platforms, reducing parameter count, yet recurrent dependencies still hinder parallelism and require full input buffering, resulting in intrinsically increased latency. CNN with Gaussian noise [10] with 6 layers is introduced to improve accuracy and a real-time speed is declared, but the model was tested on a GPU and has over 8M parameters, which remain impractical for deployment on embedded and IoT systems that lack GPUs. Hybrid models, notably CNN-LSTM [40] and CNN-GRU [11] provide improved robustness and accuracy but at the cost of high computational complexity, making them un-suitable for real-time edge platforms. PET-CGDNN [41], while more lightweight ( ∼ 70k parameters), still has relatively high Multiply-accumulate (MAC) requirement that hinders edge computing, and is also tested on a GPU. Moreover, the reliance on recurrent units limits full exploitation of parallelism. Overall, existing DL-based AMR networks primarily opti-mize accuracy, often overlooking deployment constraints. In contrast to edge computing for image tasks, RF signal recog-nition pipelines have to satisfy sub-millisecond end-to-end latency to keep pace with RF front-end ADC output rates. This makes compact models and hardware acceleration essential. We will discuss related accelerator work in Section II-B. 

2) Covert Channel Detection: HT-CCs manipulate legiti-mate RF transmissions to exfiltrate sensitive information [42]– [48]. Existing test-based and run-time defenses rely on pro-tocol monitoring, anomaly detection, or handcrafted spectral features. These approaches are typically attack-specific and may fail against sophisticated HT-CCs that mimic normal signal behavior [48]. DL–based detectors have recently been proposed using CNNs on raw I/Q inputs [5], demonstrating improved robust-ness. However, prior work focuses exclusively on algorithmic accuracy, with limited attention to model compactness, latency, or feasibility for embedded deployment. Hardware-efficient 3                                                                                                                           

> TABLE I RELATED WORK OF REPRESENTATIVE FPGA-BASED RF AMR HARDWARE ACCELERATOR IMPLEMENTATIONS .
> Work FPGA Dataset NN Weights LUT FF DSP Clock Power Type (#Bits) (MHz) (mW)
> MILCOM’19 [16] XCZU9EG Private MLP 16 158,435 16,222 210 -1,152 IPDPSW’20 [59] ZCU111 RadioML2018 CNN 2211,000 324,000 1,407 250 -MILCOM’21 [60] ZCU104 RadioML2018 CNN 6106,000 61,000 137 250 -ISCAS’21 [18] ZCU104 RadioML2016 CNN 16 74,680 57,726 1,116 70 847 IMS’21 [61] ZCU111 RadioML2018 CNN 261,200 92,300 391 250 8,700 IMS’22 [15] ZCU102 RadioML2016 CNN 16 97,900 139,200 578 250 10,500 MICRO’22 [62] XCZU28DR RadioML2018 CNN 4229,000 131,000 0250 -ICCC’23 [63] XCZU5EG RadioML2016 CNN 867,779 –131 200 858 TAI’24 [14] PYNQ RadioML2018 SNN 16 31,735 50,934 0137 2,167 TWC’25 [26] XCZU3EG RadioML2016&2018 Transformer 16 43,380 29,457 328 –600 TCASAI’25 [64] VIRTEX709 RadioML2016 SNN 16 83,572 45,060 297 –361 ISCAS’25 [19] ZCU104 RadioML2018 CNN 875,365 88,623 1,728 115 1,191

architectures and accelerator support for HT-CC detection remain largely unexplored [49]. 

3) GNSS Jamming Detection: Early GNSS jamming detec-tion relies on handcrafted statistical features and classical ma-chine learning classifiers [50], [51], or on covariance/subspace-based mitigation techniques [52]. These methods typically require long observation windows and are computationally intensive. More recent work applies CNNs to spectrogram-transformed representations [6] or multimodal CNN–MLP models to raw I/Q samples [53] of the same dataset, achieving 90–99% classification accuracy for multiple jammer types. However, these models often exhibit high inference latency (e.g., several seconds) or rely on GPU evaluation, limiting applicability to real-time embedded systems. A number of NN approaches have also been developed for GPS spoofing detection [54], [55]. Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) platforms are particularly vulnerable to GNSS jam-ming and spoofing attacks [53], [56], while also facing strict constraints on communication bandwidth, energy, and privacy. As highlighted by edge-computing studies, local inference is essential for timely and autonomous decision-making on drones [57]. Moreover, AMR is also an essential task for UAV communications [58]. Nevertheless, GNSS jamming classifiers primarily emphasize accuracy and lack designs optimized for real-time, low-power execution on embedded platforms. 

B. Hardware Accelerators for RF Signal Classification 

Given the high computational cost of DL models for RF signal recognition (Section II-A1), several hardware acceler-ators have been proposed to enable low-latency AMR at the edge. Representative designs are summarized in Table I. Early work explored multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) for modulation recognition [16], achieving low PL (programmable logic) power and latency but supporting only six modulation types and using a private dataset, leaving model generaliz-ability unclear. CNN-based designs using industrial standard RadioML2016/2018 [27], [39] datasets improved accuracy but introduced substantial FPGA cost. The design in [59] achieved ultra-fast throughput but consumed 211k LUTs, 324k FFs, and 1407 DSPs, requiring high-end FPGA boards. Custom RTL pipelines [60] improved throughput but still relied on large devices and provided only moderate recognition accuracy. Low-power accelerators have also been explored. Works such as [18], [63] used 8-16 bit quantization and achieved sub-W power, but were evaluated on the older RadioML2016 dataset with short 128-sample inputs, which do not reflect modern SDR workloads, in which the proposed DL model’s parameters would scale significantly with longer input se-quences. Conversely, high-accuracy accelerators like [15], [61] require premium-grade FPGAs and draw ∼10W, exceeding many edge-device budgets. Framework-based accelerators have emerged as well. FINN, a new HLS library which can convert models from deep learning frameworks such as PyTorch to FPGA bitstream, can be used to achieve high throughput AMR [62]. However, the designs incur very large resource footprints and target only Xilinx FPGAs. Neuromorphic computing is a new energy-efficient paradigm, and Spiking Neural Network (SNN)-based AMR [14] demonstrated end-to-end low latency AMR but only works with FINN and specific Xilinx FPGA boards such as PYNQ. Another SNN implementation illustrated the energy efficiency of SNNs [64]. Transformer-based AMR [26] showed promising accuracy and reduced DSP usage, yet the Vitis AI HLS flow restricts deployment to specific high-end FPGAs, and the reported 2 ms inference latency is insufficient for SDR real-time constraints. An attention-enhanced CNN [19] introduced a parallelized on-the-fly streaming architecture with good accuracy–power efficiency tradeoffs, which can be implemented on any FPGA board or ASIC design but still required relatively high re-sources. Existing hardware accelerators primarily target a single task (e.g., AMR) and often require large FPGA resources or exhibit limited accuracy under practical Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR). They lack mechanisms for task-level adaptation without hardware redesign and do not address RF security tasks. These limitations highlight the need for a flexible, resource-efficient accelerator capable of supporting multiple RF intelligence tasks, leveraging heterogeneous accelerators to reduce resource footprint while maintaining real-time SDR throughput, which is an area that remains largely unexplored. 4         

> Fig. 2. Architecture of the proposed integer-quantized attention-infused CNN model for three RF tasks, namely AMR, HT-CC detection, and GNSS jamming classification. The kernel size, stride, and number of filters are denoted by k,s, and f, respectively. The annotated tensor dimensions are representative of the AMR task using the RadioML2018 dataset. The number of bits of the weights (INT8) and the activations (INT16), is depicted at each layer boundary. The arrows ↓and ↑denote channel dimensionality reduction and expansion, respectively. Fully connected layers are implemented as pointwise convolutions (PWConv) to map dense layer operations directly onto the hardware convolution engine.

III. P ROPOSED HARDWARE -E FFICIENT AI M ODEL FOR RF SIGNAL RECOGNITION 

Our goal is to identify a single hardware-friendly model that performs effectively across diverse RF signal recognition tasks. The same model architecture is used across all three RF tasks, but for each task, it is trained separately end-to-end, resulting in different weights and hyperparameter tuning. Switching tasks at deployment simply requires loading the corresponding trained weights and reprogramming the hyperparameters at the software level without hardware redesign. Fig. 2 details the data flow in (channel, height, width) format, annotating kernel sizes, strides, and per-layer bit precisions, following PyTorch conventions to ensure straightforward reproduction using DL frameworks. 

A. Learnable Downsampling via the LSDec Module 

Decimation is a standard signal processing technique for reducing sequence length while preserving temporal structure. From a deep learning perspective, we introduce a downsam-pling operator, implemented as a shared Conv1d kernel applied independently to the I and Q streams. Using a single shared kernel for both channels instead of immediately applying a 2D convolution enforces an inductive bias that encourages symmetric I/Q processing and avoids premature cross-channel mixing [19]. We set the kernel size k and stride s strictly equal ( k = s = D), yielding a decimation factor D. This reduces the I/Q sequence of length L by a factor of D (yielding a shortened output length of L/D ), thereby proportionally lowering the computational cost and memory footprint for all subsequent layers. We refer to this component globally as LSDec (Section IV-B). 

B. Lightweight Attention-CNN Backbone 

Following decimation, the features are processed by a com-pact Attention-CNN model. Here we summarize the proposed model and its algorithmic adaptations: 

1) 1D-to-2D Spatial Receptive Field: The decimated I/Q streams are concatenated into a tensor of shape (1 , 2, L/D ),where the height dimension encodes the I/Q pair. The sub-sequent Conv2d layer with 36 parallel filters of 2 × 8 kernel size spans both rows, enabling joint I/Q feature extraction. In contrast, applying separate 1D convolutions would isolate the channels and hinder cross-channel feature learning, reducing accuracy. This 2D formulation leverages spatial correlations, analogous to images-based CNNs, and aligns with established RF baselines such as [18]. 

2) Tunable Hardware-Friendly Attention: We integrate a lightweight channel-attention block between the convolutional layers for feature map calibration. Our tunable SE-style [65] attention uses adaptive max-pooling instead of average pool-ing, and ReLU instead of Sigmoid activation, to ensure hardware-friendly deployment without accuracy loss. The reduction ratio (defaulting from 36 to 4 neurons) is task-configurable, enabling algorithmic adaptation to different RF tasks (e.g., from AMR to HT-CC) for higher accuracy. 

3) Reduced Filter Count and Pooling: Compared to the baseline model [5], [18] for AMR the first convolution layer (CL) has a reduced number of filters from 45 to 36 and we inserted an additional max-pooling layer after the second convolution, halving the intermediate feature vector length as most parameters originated from the first fully connected layer. These changes reduce parameter count and memory footprint with minimal impact on accuracy. 

4) Full-Integer Quantization Scheme: We use PyTorch to train the model end-to-end. Post-training integer quantization is applied to the full model. We propose a specific W8A16-INT format. All weights are quantized to INT8 to minimize the memory footprint and enable efficient hardware multiply-accumulate (MAC) units. Crucially, intermediate activations are maintained at INT16 precision rather than INT8. Because raw I/Q samples exhibit a much higher dynamic range than bounded image pixels, aggressive INT8 activation quantization causes significant classification accuracy degradation. The requantization between layers is achieved purely by right-shift-based scaling. This W8A16-INT format entirely eliminates floating-point units and LUT-based non-linear activation func-tions from the FPGA datapath, significantly reducing latency, power, and resources. 5 

> Fig. 3. Microarchitecture of the proposed heterogeneous AI accelerator SoC for multi-task RF signal recognition. It integrates a quad-core ARM Cortex-A53 CPU with SIMD engines; the proposed LSDec for task-configurable decimation synchronized with RF front end (clock domain crossing with asynchronous AXI4-Stream FIFO is supported for the subsequent heterogeneous stages); a parallelized Conv2d engine with shared PWConv lanes; a fused Conv-MaxPool engine with dual pipeline implementation. Each accelerator block has its own kernel memory and AXI interface.

IV. H ETEROGENEOUS AI H ARDWARE ACCELERATOR 

A. Design Goals and Real-Time Constraints 

Most existing AMR classifiers typically operate with shifting-kernel convolution, requiring full-frame buffering be-fore inference. For high-rate SDR front ends (e.g., AD9361 operating up to 61.44 MSPS), such buffering introduces un-avoidable latency and leads to further frame drops. Our prior streaming accelerator on FPGA [19] eliminated buffering by using stationary kernels and streaming processing, but required substantial LUT/DSP resources available only on premium FPGAs. The present work generalizes that concept into a heterogeneous SoC suitable for low-power and resource-constrained devices (Fig. 3). The SoC executes several layers cooperatively across an ARM Cortex-A53 CPU cluster (typical IoT and embedded CPU) and a compact pipelined accelerator on FPGA, managed by a lightweight co-execution controller. To capture wideband spectral features, the RF front-end operates at a sample rate of Fs, streaming raw I/Q samples directly to the AI SoC as previously depicted in the system overview in Fig. 1. In heterogeneous embedded platforms, the CPU typically exhibits availability due to the event-driven nature of sensing workloads [66]. To leverage this, we partition the workload between the FPGA and CPU. The design goal is to balance this load to achieve a sub-100 μs inference latency (approx. >10 kFPS), ensuring high-density spectrum monitor-ing while utilizing cooperative heterogeneous resources. 

B. Learnable Streaming Decimator (LSDec) 

The learnable decimator is implemented as a stationary Conv1d kernel interfacing directly with the high-speed RF ADC. A single shared set of k = D weights is applied independently to the I and Q channels, performing decimation and feature extraction on the fly. As shown in Fig. 4, unlike shifting-kernel convolutions, the stationary design exploits the non-overlapping property of stride s = k = D. Consequently, as each ADC sample arrives per clock cycle, it is multiplied by its corresponding weight and added to a running accumulator. After D clock cycles, the accumulator yields one valid output and resets. This eliminates shift registers, requiring only one MAC unit per channel and bypassing full-frame buffering. 

C. Accelerator Microarchitecture 

Fig. 3 shows the proposed heterogeneous accelerator with unified memory architecture. To maximize data locality during CPU execution, feature maps and CPU-side weights are stored in DRAM in 1D row-major order (RMO), aligning naturally with the Cortex-A53 cache hierarchy and SIMD instructions. In contrast, the accelerator operates on 3D ( C × H × W )tensorized feature maps. The conversion is explained in Sec-tion IV-C4. 

1) Conv2d Engine: Pretrained INT8 weights are partitioned in on-chip memory. The first Conv2d layer partitions its 

N = 36 filters such that Ka filters execute on the accelerator and N − Ka on the CPU. The hardware datapath is fully pipelined (input registering, multiplier stage, accumulator). After the initial pipeline fill, each processing element (PE) sustains a continuous throughput of one valid MAC operation per clock cycle. The CPU and accelerator operate in parallel on mutually exclusive filter subsets, writing to the shared memory. The dynamic workload distribution across available CPU cores will be discussed in Section IV-D. 6       

> Fig. 4. Hardware architecture of LSDec. Utilizing a shared, stationary weights kernel for the I and Q channels, the module exploits the non-overlapping property of stride s=k=D. This allows a single MAC pair per channel to process incoming ADC samples every clock cycle. A valid decimated output is generated, and the accumulator is reset, every Dclock cycles.

2) PWConv Engine (Folded): PWConv is mathematically equivalent to dense layers; its operations can be folded into the convolution engine by interpreting neurons as channels. Reusing the existing Conv2d pipelined datapath completely eliminates the need for dedicated dense-layer IPs, strictly reducing area and power, with only a lightweight control signal that configures the engine between the inference phases. The overhead is negligible compared to a separate dense layer IP. A quantitative discussion will be presented in Section VII. Lightweight, task-configurable Attention layers are executed entirely on the CPU to enable adaptation (e.g., modifying the reduction ratio) without accelerator IPs. 

3) Conv-MaxPool Fused Engine: The second convolution and subsequent max-pooling stages dominate computational cost. Executing them separately and sequentially using two separate accelerator IPs would require writing and re-reading intermediate feature maps, incurring significant latency and DDR bandwidth penalties with extra roundtrip and additional AXI interfaces. As illustrated in Fig. 3, our fused dual-pipeline engine fetches a sliding window using shifted on-chip buffers to process two adjacent spatial outputs concurrently. A hardware comparator immediately evaluates the outputs on the fly, storing only the maximum value to streamline the pooling operator. This halves the memory traffic and eliminates intermediate transactions. 

4) Data Path and Memory Architecture: The heterogeneous SoC connects the streaming RF domain and the shared-memory execution domain (Fig. 1). To bridge the high-speed RF ADC clock domain, LSDec utilizes a dual-path broadcast. A point-to-point AXI4-Stream interface feeds the decimated samples directly to the Conv2d Engine, bypassing DDR roundtrip to minimize pipeline latency. Concurrently, an AXI master interface with an asynchronous FIFO safely burst-writes the decimated sequence into the unified DDR memory as 1D row-major array. Data layout transformations (tensorization) are handled seamlessly at the hardware IP boundaries with zero software overhead. While the CPU operates on 1D flat arrays with row-major indexing with direct SIMD acceleration, the receiving logic inside the accelerator’s on-chip buffers utilizes hardware line buffers and shift registers to demultiplex the 1D AXI stream into the 3D parallel registers required by the PEs. The kernel memories of the accelerator engines are implemented as fully partitioned, distributed on-chip memory located physi-cally adjacent to the PEs, enabling single-cycle parallel weight access during inference. To achieve shared-memory execution for distributed layers, the CPU and accelerator operate in parallel on mutually exclusive convolutional filter subsets (or neurons, in the case of PWConv/Dense layers). The hardware accelerator bypasses the CPU cache, utilizing the DMA engine to read inputs and write outputs directly to the physical DDR. Concurrently, the CPU fetches the exact same inputs from the unified memory through its native L1/L2 cache hierarchy, distributing the workload across available cores based on availability, and writes its assigned output channels back to the DDR via the cache. 

D. Co-scheduling Algorithm and Cache Coherency 

Let a convolution/dense layer with N output channels produce output vector: y = {y0, y 1, ..., y N −1}, where each yi

corresponds to either an output feature map of a convolution layer or a neuron output of a dense layer. Let ta and tc

denote per-channel execution latency on accelerator and CPU, respectively. As the CPU and accelerator initiate inference in parallel, total latency is: 

T (Ka) = max( Kata, (N − Ka)tc)

The unconstrained minimizer is computed when the two finish simultaneously: 

Kata = ( N − Ka)tc → K∗ 

> a

= N t c

ta + tc

However, shared-memory execution introduces cache-line boundary hazards: if CPU and accelerator write to addresses inside the same cache line, stale data or premature evictions can occur. The ARM-based CPU has 64-byte cache line size and if the CPU and accelerator update data that fall inside the same cache line, the CPU cache will reload data unexpectedly or evict accelerator-written entries, causing corruption and nondeterminism. Let each channel output yi occupy a contiguous memory segment of B bytes and let the CPU cache line size be Lc.The boundary address ∆ = KaB must align to a cache line, e.g., ( KaB) mod Lc = 0. Thus the feasible set is defined as: 

K = {Ka ∈ 0, ...N : ( KaB) mod Lc = 0 }

We seek the aligned partition that minimizes the total execution time 

K∗ 

> a

= argmin Ka∈K T (Ka)

As the latency equation is convex in Ka, and K contains discrete candidates defined by ( KaB) mod Lc = 0, an enu-meration of K yields the optimal solution. The proposed CPU-accelerator co-scheduling algorithm is illustrated in Alg. 1. It is designed to be portable across dif-ferent embedded CPU architectures. On our ARM Cortex-A53 processor, a particular subset of layers is offloaded to the CPU; however, when deployed on CPUs with different performance characteristics, the algorithm automatically adjusts the number of layers to be offloaded. A case study of this execution will be presented in Section VII. 7

Algorithm 1 Cache-Aligned Heterogeneous Co-Scheduling  

> 1:

Input: N , B, Lc 

> 2:

Output: Ka 

> 3:

ta ← ProfileAcceleratorLatency ()  

> 4:

tc ← ProfileCPULatency ()  

> 5:

Kideal ← N t c 

> ta+tc
> 6:

K ← ∅  

> 7:

for K = 0 to N do  

> 8:

if (KB ) mod Lc = 0 then  

> 9:

K ← K ∪ { K} 

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

Tmin ← ∞ , Ka ← 0 

> 13:

for K ∈ K do  

> 14:

T ← max( Kt a, (N − K)tc) 

> 15:

if T < T min then  

> 16:

Tmin ← T 

> 17:

Ka ← K 

> 18:

end if  

> 19:

end for  

> 20: 21:

return Ka

Our framework integrates Alg. 1 with runtime adaptive profiling (RAP) to manage CPU availability. The latencies 

ta and tc can be profiled statically at deployment or updated dynamically with each frame via the ARM CPU cycle counter register, readable in a single instruction with negligible over-head. The algorithm natively extends to multi-core topologies. If M symmetric CPU cores are allocated to the RF tasks, the expected aggregate per-channel latency is estimated as 

tc/M , since filter computations are independent across output channels. This linear scaling model provides an accurate initial partition; measured latency from subsequent frames refines the estimate further. The feasible set K is further constrained by a core-symmetry condition: (N − K) mod M = 0 , ensuring an evenly distributed software workload across cores. Where cache-line alignment restricts the feasible set, memory padding can be applied to force the output channel byte size to a mul-tiple of Lc to unlock unconstrained fine-grained partitioning. The framework operates entirely at the application layer, and partition updates take effect at I/Q frame boundaries: updating 

Ka requires only writing new channel-start index values to each core’s parameter block and a single DMA transfer descriptor write, with overhead negligible relative to the 98 

μs frame period. In this work, to guarantee strict real-time deterministic execution, we evaluate a worst-case scenario where a single core is allocated for RF tasks (Section VII). In deployments, the framework automatically offloads more filters to CPU, reducing the accelerator’s dynamic power proportionally to the fraction of idle PEs. Regarding synchronization and data path coherency, the co-execution controller operates a lightweight state machine: (1) waits for both the CPU and accelerator completion flags; (2) issues a targeted data cache clean-and-invalidate instruction over the CPU-written memory region; (3) waits for all dirty cache lines to be physically written to the shared DDR; (4) sig-nals the DMA engine to begin reading the merged feature map for the subsequent layer. Because the co-scheduling algorithm guarantees that the partition boundary KaB is strictly cache-line aligned, the CPU and accelerator write to mutually exclu-sive physical cache lines, completely eliminating false-sharing hazards and ensuring the flush covers only the CPU-written region. The synchronization overhead is therefore bounded by the number of CPU-written cache lines; a quantitative analysis of this worst-case overhead is provided in Section VII-C. V. E XPERIMENTAL SETUP 

A. Datasets 

We evaluate the proposed heterogeneous AI accelerator on three representative RF tasks: AMR, HT-CC detection, and GNSS jamming classification, using three publicly available datasets that differ in signal structure, frame length, and SNR conditions, enabling a comprehensive assessment of general-izability. 

1) AMR RadioML2018: We use the RadioML2018 dataset [27] for the AMR task. It provides 2,555,904 frames of over-the-air RF captures spanning SNRs from -20 to +30 dB. We follow the 50%–25%–25% training/validation/test split used in [24], and evaluate on the 11 normal modulation classes (FM, GMSK, OQPSK, BPSK, 8PSK, AM-SSB-SC, 4ASK, AM-DSB-SC, QPSK, OOK, and 16QAM) as in [14], [24]. Each frame consists of 2 × 1024 I/Q samples. 

2) HOST HT-CC: The HT-CC dataset [5] contains over-the-air IEEE 802.11 transmissions collected via a bladeRF SDR, comprising four representative HT-CC mechanisms spanning PHY-layer, synchronization, dirty-constellation, and analog front-end attacks, along with a clean reference class. Each SNR point (1–20 dB in 4 dB steps) includes 2,000 frames of size 2 × 640 , totaling 80k samples. Due to the smaller dataset size, we use an 80%—10%—10% split for train-ing/validation/testing. 

3) GNSS Jamming: We use a publicly available GNSS-band interference dataset [28] containing six classes: no-interference and five jammer types (continuous-wave, FM, chirp, narrowband, and pulsed). Frames consist of raw com-plex baseband samples generated across controlled SNR con-ditions. The dataset includes 6,000 training and 1,500 test samples and is used to evaluate cross-domain generalizability due to its distinct spectral structure. 

B. AI and Hardware Development Setup 

For fair comparison and reproducibility, all models (this work and baselines), are trained in the same software envi-ronment on an NVIDIA A100 GPU using identical training, validation, and test splits. All models are optimized end-to-end using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 

10 −3, and cross-entropy loss. The proposed hardware was synthesized and implemented on a Zynq™ UltraScale+™ MP-SoC ZCU104 Evaluation board. FPGA synthesis uses Vivado 2025.1, and hardware–software co-design is performed in Vitis Unified IDE 2025.1. A summary of the development platform is provided in Table II. 8           

> TABLE II MODEL TRAINING AND HARDWARE DEVELOPMENT ENVIRONMENT
> Category Details
> GPU NVIDIA A100 80 GB PCIe CPU Intel ®Xeon ®Gold 6300 @ 2 GHz RAM 128 GB Operating System Ubuntu 24.04.2 LTS PyTorch / Python 2.7.1 / 3.11.14 CUDA 12.8 FPGA Zynq™ UltraScale+™ MPSoC ZCU104 Xilinx Vivado & Vitis v2025.1

VI. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

A. Model Comparison and Analysis 

We conducted a comparative analysis of various models. The selected baselines include both AMR-specific models [8], [10], [11], [18], [24], [40], [41], and widely adopted general purpose edge-oriented models, such as MobileNet [33] and MobileViT [67], which are included since recent studies formulate AMR as an image-like learning problem, enabling the reuse of vision-oriented architectures. We first train and evaluate the models on the AMR task, with results summarized in Section VI-A1 and Table III. Be-cause specialized DL models for HT-CC and GNSS jamming remain underexplored (Sections II-A2 and II-A3), and all three datasets are comprised of raw I/Q sequences aligned with our end-to-end inference goal, we conduct further experiments by training and evaluating the existing AMR baselines on the two additional RF tasks to comprehensively benchmark the proposed model against the baselines. The proposed Attention-CNN model serves as a unified backbone across all three RF tasks. At deployment, specific tasks are instantiated simply by loading their corresponding pre-trained weights from the shared DDR. If baseline accuracy on a new task is suboptimal, the model is easily reconfigured in software by adjusting the attention reduction ratio or the num-ber of neurons in the first dense layer. For example, because our default hyperparameters were optimized for AMR, we ap-plied this software-level tuning for the HT-CC dataset (denoted as ”Task Tuned” in Table IV), whereas the GNSS-Jamming task achieved high accuracy without modification. Crucially, these adjustments are handled entirely by the CPU and the Conv2d Engine without requiring any hardware redesign. The three tasks can be scheduled sequentially, as the information is carried by all frames. This high-rate task-multiplexing is possible thanks to the 98 μs per-frame inference latency and the small weight count of the model which makes model updates very fast. To the best of our knowledge, no prior RF hardware accelerator has demonstrated deployment flexibility across distinct RF intelligence tasks (spectrum monitoring, security, navigation) on a single hardware instance using a unified AI architecture. 

1) AMR: Existing approaches for the AMR task predom-inantly prioritize accuracy at the expense of model size and computational complexity, neglecting the fact that RF signal classification problems are latency-critical and require local inference to satisfy speed and data privacy requirements. As shown in Table III, in terms of average accuracy across all SNRs, CGDNet [11] achieves 71.1% accuracy on the                                                 

> TABLE III COMPARISON OF AI MODELS ON RADIO ML2018 DATASET (SNR -20 TO
> 30 DB). A LL MODELS ARE TRAINED ON THE SAME GPU USING IDENTICAL TRAINING /VALIDATION /TEST SPLITS EXCEPT [14]. A VERAGE ACCURACY ACROSS ALL AVAILABLE SNR VALUES IS REPORTED .
> Model Accuracy #Param kMACs
> CGDNet [11] 71.1% 662,533 171,541 SNN (IQ) [14] 64.3% 83,000 –CNN (IQ) [18] 70.1% 295,055 3,648 DAE [24] 67.3% 14,989 14,094 CLDNN2 [40] 68.6% 696,843 504,681 IC-AMCNet [10] 72.9% 8,604,043 119,638 LSTM (IQ) [8] 74.9% 201,088 207,095 MobileNetv2 [33] 74.9% 2,237,387 196,835 MobileViTv2-0.5 [67] 75.5% 1,116,036 142,521 PET-CGDNN [41] 74.1% 71,614 72,123 This Work 73.3% 19,961 346

RadioML2018 dataset but requires over 660k parameters and a substantial computational cost. This trend becomes more pronounced in IC-AMCNet [10], which reaches 72.9% accu-racy while employing more than 8.6M parameters. Recurrent architectures further exacerbate this issue: the LSTM-based model in [8] attains a higher accuracy of 74.9%, yet incurs sig-nificantly higher kMACs and suffers from inherent sequential dependencies, limiting parallelism and throughput in hardware implementations. General-purpose edge models (MobileNet [33] and Mo-bileViT [67]) demonstrate strong accuracy when trained on the RadioML2018 dataset. However, they require millions of parameters and hundreds of thousands of kMACs. However, these architectures are primarily designed for vision work-loads, where end-to-end latencies on the order of several milliseconds are acceptable. In contrast, RF signal recogni-tion operates under strict real-time constraints as the data is streamed from the SDR front-end ADC. These translate into excessive FPGA resource utilization or ASIC area and power consumption, making them impractical for embedded and IoT platforms without premium mobile SoCs. Several lightweight models attempt to address deployability concerns. DAE [24] is an LSTM-Autoencoder that employs fewer than 15k parameters, comparable to the proposed design; however, its reliance on recurrent layers results in lower parallelism and higher computational complexity, and the accuracy is limited at 67.3%. PET-CGDNN [41], a hybrid CNN–GRU architecture, achieves a relatively high accuracy of 74.1% while reducing parameters and kMACs compared to many deep CNN counterparts, yet its computational cost remains substantially higher than that of the proposed model. In contrast, the proposed model achieves a balanced tradeoff between accuracy, model compactness, and computational efficiency. It attains 73.3% average accuracy across all SNRs, outperforming the baseline CNN [18] by 3.2% while reducing parameter count by 93.2%. Compared with the lightweight DAE [24], the proposed model improves accuracy by 6% while requiring only 346 kMACs, orders of magnitude fewer operations than most competing approaches. Compared to lightweight models such as DAE [24], the proposed model also exhibits greater robustness in low-SNR conditions. As shown in Fig. 5, it achieves 90% accuracy 9          

> Fig. 5. Accuracy vs. SNR curve on the RML2018 dataset for normal classes. Quantization reduces accuracy, but when the SNR is relatively high, the difference is minimal.
> Fig. 6. The confusion matrix at SNR = 0 dB for the AMR task using RadioML2018 dataset. Comparison of this work compared to the most lightweight model in the literature (DAE) and the baseline CNN: (a) This work, (b) This work (quantized), (c) DAE [24] (d) CNN(IQ) [18].

starting from 0 dB and exceeds 99% accuracy above 4 dB, while DAE requires 4 dB to exceed 90% and 8 dB to reach 99%, a consistent 4 dB SNR advantage, highlighting the ef-fectiveness of the learnable decimation coupled with attention recalibration in enhancing discriminative feature extraction under higher noise. This improvement is supported by three pieces of evidence. First, the SNR curves in Fig. 5 confirm this advantage across lower SNR regime compared to lightweight baselines. Second, the confusion matrix at SNR = 0 dB (Fig. 6) shows that the proposed model better separates spectrally similar modulation pairs that lightweight baseline models con-fuse under noise, reflecting the attention mechanism’s ability to recalibrate channel features toward higher discriminative signal characteristics, and showing improved classification fidelity at lower SNR by comparing with the most lightweight model in the literature, e.g. DAE [24], and a baseline CNN with the same number of convolutional and dense layers [5],                                                  

> Fig. 7. Figure of merit: accuracy–complexity trade-off for AMR measured as average accuracy (SNR >0 dB) versus kMACs. Log-scale is applied on the complexity axis to visualize both the huge gap between the proposed model and prior work, and the small variations among certain existing models. TABLE IV COMPARISON OF AI MODELS ON THE HT-CC DATASET (SNR 1 TO 29
> DB). A LL MODELS ARE TRAINED ON THE SAME GPU USING IDENTICAL TRAINING /VALIDATION /TEST SPLITS . A VERAGE ACCURACY ACROSS ALL AVAILABLE SNR VALUES IS REPORTED .
> Model Accuracy #Param kMACs
> CGDNet [11] 76.8% 660,991 130,298 CNN (IQ) [18] 91.5% 184,265 2,265 DAE [24] 79.5% 14,887 8,810 CLDNN2 [40] 93.4% 619,269 314,916 IC-AMCNet [10] 92.0% 5,457,541 74,774 LSTM (IQ) [8] 88.8% 200,320 129,434 MobileNetv2 [33] 95.2% 2,229,701 123,020 MobileViTv2-0.5 [67] 95.2% 1,114,494 89,075 PET-CGDNN [41] 84.6% 70,840 44,785 This Work 88.8% 19,760 345 This Work (Task Tuned) 90.1% 29,078 354

[18]. Third, the ablation study which we will detail later in Section VI-B, isolates each component’s contribution: LSDec alone improves accuracy from 70.1% to 71.9%, and adding attention further raises it to 73.3%, confirming both compo-nents contribute independently to improved recognition under challenging SNR conditions. A figure of merit comparing AMR average accuracy (for SNR > 0 dB) against computational complexity is shown in Fig. 7. The proposed model is markedly more efficient, requiring only 346 kMACs for the AMR task and remaining below 500 kMACs across all three RF tasks, while still achieving high recognition accuracy. This highlights the favor-able accuracy–efficiency balance of the proposed architecture relative to existing approaches. 

2) HT-CC: Similarly, on the HT-CC dataset (Table IV), we observe a pattern similar to the AMR task: high accuracy models (e.g. MobileNet, MobileViT, CLDNN2) achieve 93%-95% accuracy but require up to 300 × more parameters and 900 × more MACs than the proposed model, making them un-suitable for real-time edge computing. Lightweight baselines such as DAE and PET-CGDNN exhibit limited accuracy (79% - 85%) and also demonstrate unstable accuracy vs. SNRs, as shown in Fig. 8. The proposed model’s hyperparameters were designed for the AMR tasks but only minimal CPU-side tuning is required to increase the accuracy by adapting to the HT-CC spectral characteristics: increasing the attention bottleneck width (reduction ratio from 9 to 3) and modestly widening the first dense layer (32 to 48 neurons). This yields a task-tuned variant with 90.1% accuracy, and one to three orders of magnitude lighter than all high-accuracy baselines. These 10                                          

> Fig. 8. Accuracy vs. SNR curve on the HT-CC dataset. TABLE V COMPARISON OF AI MODELS ON GNSS J AMMING DATASET (ONE FIXED
> SNR AND NO SWEEPING ). A LL MODELS ARE TRAINED ON THE SAME
> GPU ( EXCEPT [53]) USING IDENTICAL TRAINING /TEST SPLITS .
> Model Accuracy #Param kMACs
> CGDNet [11] 92.1% 661,248 1,819,486 DAE [24] 99.9% 14,904 225,258 CNN (IQ) [18] 99.9% 4,714,127 58,886 CLDNN2 [40] 97.7% 3,764,998 8,087,317 IC-AMCNet [10] 99.7% 134,301,446 1,912,307 MobileNetv2 [33] 99.9% 2,230,982 3,147,701 MobileViTv2-0.5 [67] 99.9% 1,114,751 2,279,123 PET-CGDNN [41] 99.8% 71,614 1,164,478 MLP+CNN [53] 99.0% --This Work 99.5% 19,793 374

adjustments affect only CPU-executed layers, validating the benefit of our heterogeneous design: task adaptation without hardware changes. 

3) GNSS Jamming: For GNSS jamming classification (Ta-ble V), the dataset provides a single controlled SNR condition; cross-SNR generalization is outside the dataset scope. The proposed model attains a > 99% accuracy, comparable to state-of-the-art architectures but with five to six significantly lower computational complexity and thousands of times fewer parameters than the largest baselines. Since GNSS and AMR are both critical to UAV communication and navigation [53], [58], the extremely small footprint ( ∼20k parameters, 374 kMACs) makes the model especially suitable for power-efficient and latency-critical edge computing on UAVs. 

4) Differences between models and datasets: The three datasets contain the information the neural network is looking for (modulation scheme, covert channel, jamming) embedded in different fields of the transmission frame. For example, in the HT-CC dataset, there are four different underlying HT designs, with two leaking the information into the preamble, one in the payload data, and one across the entire frame. In AMR and GNSS jamming, the information is found pri-marily in the payload data field. The frame differences vary in each task, e.g., with respect to nominal for HT-CC and GNSS jamming, across underlying HT for HT-CC, and among different modulation schemes for AMR. These structural dif-ferences influence model performance (baseline models and the proposed one), as different models are optimized to capture                                            

> TABLE VI ABLATION STUDY ON RADIO ML2018 DATASET . T HE FIRST ROW CORRESPONDS TO THE BASELINE MODEL IN [18].
> Decimation Attn Redu. #Param. kMACs Acc.
> –––295,055 3,648 70.1% ––✓148,688 2,855 69.9% –✓✓148,976 2,965 71.5% LSDec ––37,016 424 71.9% LSDec –✓19,673 333 71.7% Fixed ✓✓19,952 340 64.2% LSDec ✓✓19,961 346 73.3% Fixed: Traditional fixed-rate downsampling without learned weights. LSDec: Learnable streaming decimator. Attn: Attention module. Redu.: Filters reduction of Conv2d and max-pooling after the second Conv1d.

different types of patterns. Recurrent models such as CLDNN2 are better suited for tracking long-range temporal dependen-cies, whereas image recognition CNN-based approaches excel at identifying spatial patterns within the on-the-fly image-encoded raw I/Q feature representations. 

B. Ablation Study 

We perform an ablation analysis on the RadioML2018 dataset, the most challenging and diverse of the three, allowing architectural differences to be clearly exposed. Table VI sum-marizes the impact of each component: LSDec, the attention module, and the filter-reduction/fused-pooling configuration. The first row of Table VI corresponds to the baseline CNN from [18], which operates directly on the full length of the raw I/Q sequence without any decimation, yielding 295k param-eters and 3,648 kMACs. With a significantly shorter feature vector after flattening, the first dense layer has significantly lower fully-connected weights. We also have a conspicuous computational complexity reduction (-88% kMACs) as the parallel convolutional filters operate on the notably shorter decimated feature map sequence, which was produced by the LSDec that reduces the sequence length by a factor of 

D=8 (from 1024 to 128) before the first Conv layer. Simple fixed decimation without learned weights would achieve the same parameter reductions, but at the cost of discarding critical signal information, causing accuracy to plummet to 64.2%. LSDec avoids this by performing feature extraction simultaneously with decimation using a trained kernel that learns to preserve discriminative I/Q. LSDec provides the largest hardware benefit with deci-mation, reducing parameters from 295k → 37k (–87.5%) and computational complexity from 3648 → 424 kMACs (–88.4%). This is primarily driven by the reduction in spa-tial sequence length (e.g. 1024 →128) before the subsequent layers. This also improves accuracy from 70.1% to 71.9% with trained convolutional feature extraction capabilities: hence the name learnable decimation. This shows that learned temporal compression is more effective than fixed decimation and aligns naturally with the accelerator’s streaming data path. Filter reduction and fused pooling further shrink the model to 19.7k parameters with only a 0.2% accuracy drop, making it possible for resource-limited FPGA deployments. The attention block yields accuracy gains both with and without LSDec: accuracy increases to 73.3% with LSDec, 11 

while the full model still achieves a 93.2% parameter reduction relative to the baseline. This indicates that attention effectively recovers discriminative capacity after aggressive compression, enabling a compact but high-performing model. Overall, the ablation results validate the co-design philos-ophy: LSDec enables substantial parameter reduction, filter-reduction and pooling minimizes memory and compute, and attention recovers accuracy, jointly producing a model well suited for real-time, edge-computing accelerators. VII. H ARDWARE RESULTS 

Unlike prior FPGA-only accelerators that are optimized ex-clusively for minimum inference latency, the proposed design targets deployment on resource-efficient edge SoCs. Conse-quently, direct latency comparisons with large FPGA pipelines are not meaningful. Instead, our evaluation emphasizes bal-anced CPU–accelerator co-execution, power and resource ef-ficiency, and the ability to sustain real-time throughput under realistic SDR front-end constraints for multi-task adaptability. 

A. CPU Profiling 

We first profile the full forward pass on the Cortex-A53 CPU by re-implementing the pre-trained model in C using a flat RMO memory layout. An SIMD version is also implemented with ARM Neon intrinsics to accelerate the CPU execution on each core. To establish a worst-case scenario baseline under conservative CPU availability assumptions, this profiling is conducted as a single-thread case study to assess the worst-case performance guarantee. The co-scheduling algorithm automatically rebalances as more cores or faster CPUs are available, using either RAP or static profiling. The code is compiled directly on the CPU for execution. The purely CPU-based execution for the complete AI model requires 1,114 μs .Layer-level profiling shows that the Conv2d layer requires 353 

μs and the Conv-MaxPool layer requires 754 μs . The attention and all dense layers require < 20 μs combined. These results demonstrate that convolutional layers dominate runtime, mo-tivating their execution on a specialized hardware accelerator. The attention layer is highly efficient on CPU ( < 10 μs ) and also for task flexibility (e.g. changing the reduction ratio to adapt to another RF task), thus it is completely executed on the CPU directly. Our CPU baseline uses direct Neon SIMD with row-major indexing rather than standard im2col+GEMM libraries that lack native support for our custom W8A16-INT quantization for RF tasks, and widening weights to 16 bits requires an extra memory pass. Using the Conv2d layer as a case study: the INT16 input of shape (1,2,128) and kernel size (2 ×8) with 36 filters produces a 16 × 121 INT16 (3,872 bytes) workspace. This 7.5 × memory expansion over the 512-byte input eliminate cache-tiling benefits. For the Conv-MaxPool layer, the required im2col workspace (49KB) exceeds the Cortex-A53’s 32KB L1 data cache, introducing cache-refill overheads that outweigh GEMM efficiencies. Direct SIMD avoids this data duplication, representing a highly optimized embedded baseline. Regarding the SIMD execution, vector-ization is applied across the inner MAC loop. The smaller  

> Fig. 9. FPGA resource and power comparison at 125 MHz. Scenario 1: accelerator with AXI interfaces, attention offloaded. Scenario 2: heterogeneous split with reduced accelerator filters. Scenario 3 (final): PWConv folding to reuse conv engines, cutting resource usage and power. Only FPGA PL power is reported to ensure fair comparison with existing work, with the assumption that an embedded CPU is always present in a system.

kernels require gathered access, frequent address updates, and horizontal reductions. This makes the convolution path memory-bound, keeping the practical throughput below the nominal 8 × lane width. In contrast, the fully-connected layers operate on continuous and cache-resident vectors with simple strides and deep inner loops, allowing near-ideal vector issue and accumulation. 

B. Hardware Accelerator: Latency and Resource 

The proposed accelerator implements deeply pipelined con-volution engines with input–weight forwarding and a dual-pipeline fused Conv–MaxPool unit (Fig. 3). Mapping all convolutional filters to the NN accelerator on FPGA PL reduces both the Conv2d and Conv–MaxPool layers to 42 

μs each, and accelerates the first dense layer from 17 μs 

to 7 μs . However, this configuration consumes 69k LUTs, 50k FFs, and 946 DSP slices, with 1.4 W dynamic power at 125 MHz. To achieve deployability on power- and area-constrained SoCs, we introduce the heterogeneous execution model in which a subset of convolutional filters and dense neurons is intentionally offloaded on the CPU. This reduces resource usage to 55k LUTs, 41k FFs, and 937 DSPs (0.9 W). After applying PWConv folding, the final accelerator on FPGA PL uses only 38k LUTs, 26k FFs, and 405 DSPs, consuming 0.54 W while sustaining 98 μs end-to-end latency, which is measured on the MPSoC ZCU104 board and includes all synchronization, cache flush, and DMA setup overhead, as illustrated in Fig. 9. Compared to state-of-the-art (previously seen in Table I), the current design adds the lowest power (0.54W), lowest FPGA resource usage, well below prior art while achieving satisfying inference speed and striking the power, performance, area (PPA) balance. Regarding the Conv-MaxPool fusion: the second convo-lution layer produces a (9,1,116) INT16 intermediate tensor (2,088 bytes) and implementing separate Conv and MaxPool IPs would require a DDR roundtrip and extra DMA trans-action. The fused dual-pipeline engine fuses two operators and halves memory traffic simultaneously. The Conv-MaxPool layer can match the Conv2d engine latency, producing a more balanced inference pipeline. The trade-off is reduced flexi-bility: the fused engine assumes max-pooling always follows 12                            

> Fig. 10. Execution time profiling. The last dense layer only requires 1 μs
> and is discarded on the figure. Log-scale is applied for visual clarity due to huge execution time difference. TABLE VII COMPARISON WITH RECENT STATE -OF -THE -ART SUB -W ATT (PL) FPGA IMPLEMENTATIONS
> Metric TWC’25 [26] TCASAI’25 [64] This Work
> Weights Quant. 16-bit 16-bit 8-bit
> LUT 43,380 83,572 37,572
> FF 29,457 45,060 25,683
> DSP 328 297 405
> Power 0.60 W 0.36 W 0.54 W
> Latency 2 ms 453.1 μs98 μs

this convolution layer with a maxpooling with a stride of two. Nevertheless, this is appropriate for the co-designed Attention-CNN model which uses this architecture across all three RF tasks and achieves good accuracy and satisfies design goals. Execution timing for all configurations: CPU-only, CPU-SIMD, full NN accelerator (NN-ACC), and heterogeneous accelerator (reduced filters and includes all AXI data in-terfaces, memory controller, and DMA), is shown in Fig. 10. As expected, convolution benefits most from hardware parallelism, while attention and dense layer operations remain efficient on the CPU. For reference, the A53 cluster consumes 2.64 W dynamic power. In practical IoT and embedded platforms, a CPU is always present to manage control flow, scheduling, and system tasks; therefore, some level of CPU activity is unavoidable regardless of the accelerator design. Reporting accelerator-only power can thus be misleading, since real deployments inherently incur CPU dynamic power whenever computation is orches-trated. Our heterogeneous design follows this system model by assigning lightweight operations to the CPU while offloading compute-intensive layers to the FPGA, enabling an efficient division of labor. Compared with recent state-of-the-art sub-W PL implementations (see Table VII), our approach achieves the best trade-off: although certain designs such as SNNs achieve low power, they typically exhibit limited interoperability with CPU-side processing and require significant LUT/FF resources whereas transformer models introduce significant latency. In contrast, our design maintains low PL power, reduces resource usage, and achieves lower latency, offering a more practical and balanced solution for embedded inference. 

C. Co-Scheduling Algorithm Case Study on Conv2d Layer 

To illustrate the operation of the co-scheduling algorithm 1 assuming no padding, we present a case study of the first Conv2d layer. Empirically measured execution times are Ta = 

> Fig. 11. Confusion matrix on GNSS jamming and HT-CC (SNR=13 dB) detection tasks with the quantized model.

42 μs for the accelerator and Tc = 353 μs for the CPU (SIMD). The unconstrained optimal filter split, determined by the standard load-balancing condition, is approximately 33 fil-ters on the accelerator and 3 on the CPU. However, correctness requires cache-line-aligned writes due to the shared contigu-ous memory buffer. The output tensor has shape 36 × 121 

with 16-bit precision after requantization, corresponding to 

121 × 2 = 242 bytes per channel. Since we have 64-byte cache lines, 242 × 33 = 7,986 bytes is not aligned (7986 mod 64 =34). The co-scheduling algorithm therefore selects the closest aligned partition: 32 filters on the accelerator and 4 on the CPU. This preserves throughput, prevents coherence stalls, and ensures deterministic correctness. While this case study establishes our worst-case single-thread baseline, real-world deployment adapts to dynamic CPU availability. As detailed in Section IV-D, if M cores are allocated, the framework utilizes core-symmetry constraints and memory padding to seamlessly distribute the expanded software partition, further lowering the dynamic power of the accelerator engines. Following the sequence in Section IV-D, the worst-case synchronization overhead consists of two components: execu-tion asymmetry, which the co-scheduling algorithm (Alg. 1) already minimizes, and the cache flush duration itself. The Conv2d layer represents the worst-case synchronization sce-nario, as its per-filter output (242 bytes) is the largest across layers. For the single-core baseline, the flush covers the CPU-written region: 4 filters × 242 bytes = 968 bytes (16 cache lines), bounding the peak synchronization latency to approx-imately 1.3 μs on the Cortex-A53. This minimal overhead is absorbed within the measured 98 μs end-to-end latency. With 

M cores, dirty cache lines are flushed in parallel, ensuring this overhead does not increase. Finally, compared with conventional processors, ARM CPUs typically consume ∼750mW/Core under load, yet re-main an order of magnitude slower than GPUs on NN work-loads. Conversely, a high-end GPU (NVIDIA A100) achieves 13 μs inference but consumes in the range of 250–400 W, making it incompatible with any embedded RF platforms. These comparisons highlight the suitability of the proposed heterogeneous architecture for real-time spectrum intelligence. 

D. Quantization for Full-Integer Inference 

The proposed model trained in PyTorch and the W8A16-INT quantized model (described in Section III-B) are rewritten into a custom inference graph (C and Verilog) designed for full-integer execution. For the AMR task on RadioML2018, the floating-point model achieves 73.3% average accuracy 13 

across all SNRs and 99.6% for SNR > 0 dB. After quantiza-tion, accuracy remains high at 72.2% and 99.4%, respectively, with a total memory footprint of only 20 KB. On the HT-CC dataset, quantization yields 89.3% accuracy versus the 90.1% floating-point baseline. On the GNSS jamming dataset, accuracy after quantization remains 98.5% across all classes. Figs. 5 and 8 confirm that the quantized model deployed on hardware (green curves) closely tracks the floating-point GPU model (blue curves) for all SNRs. Notably, for the AMR task, both models exceed 99% accuracy from 4 dB onward, indicating that quantization does not affect the SNR regime of practical interest. Representative confusion matrices for the quantized models on the (GNSS jamming dataset and the HT-CC dataset (SNR=13 dB) are shown in Fig. 11, confirming that class-level performance is preserved. CONCLUSION 

In this work, we presented, to the best of our knowledge, the first heterogeneous AI accelerator designed specifically for multi-task RF signal recognition at the edge. By deploying the learnable streaming decimator directly at the ADC interface, the system bridges the speed mismatch between high-rate RF front-ends and power-efficient AI cores without full-frame buffering. A cache-coherent co-scheduling algorithm ensures safe and balanced parallel execution across CPU and acceler-ator cores under a unified memory architecture. The proposed heterogeneous framework provides a highly practical, scalable solution for real-time, multi-task spectrum intelligence on low-power edge devices, achieving an end-to-end inference latency of 98 μs. The resulting model achieves the best accuracy-complexity trade-off among existing RF classifiers while sup-porting rapid task tuning by modifying CPU-executed parts of the model, demonstrated across AMR, HT-CC, and GNSS-jamming classification, eliminating any hardware redesign. This flexibility, combined with sub-W power consumption and real-time throughput, makes the proposed accelerator well-suited for embedded SDR platforms and edge-computing systems such as UAVs. Future extensions include scaling for additional RF tasks and exploring other models for further optimized accuracy within the same heterogeneous paradigm. REFERENCES [1] A. Jagannath, J. Jagannath, and T. Melodia, “Redefining Wireless Communication for 6G: Signal Processing Meets Deep Learning With Deep Unfolding,” IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 528–536, 2021. [2] Z. Qin, L. Liang, Z. Wang, S. Jin, X. Tao, W. Tong, and G. Y. Li, “AI Empowered Wireless Communications: From Bits to Semantics,” 

Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 112, no. 7, pp. 621–652, 2024. [3] J. M. de la Rosa, “AI-Managed Cognitive Radio Digitizers,” IEEE Circuits and Systems Magazine , vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 10–39, 2022. [4] W. Xiao, Z. Luo, and Q. Hu, “A Review of Research on Signal Modulation Recognition Based on Deep Learning,” Electronics , vol. 11, no. 17, 2022. [5] A. R. D´ ıaz-Rizo, A. Emad, H. Aboushady, and H.-G. Stratigopoulos, “Covert Communication Channels Based on Hardware Trojans: Open-Source Dataset and AI-Based Detection,” in 2024 IEEE International Symposium on Hardware Oriented Security and Trust (HOST) , pp. 101– 106, 2024. [6] R. Morales Ferre, A. de la Fuente, and E. S. Lohan, “Jammer Classi-fication in GNSS Bands Via Machine Learning Algorithms,” Sensors ,vol. 19, no. 22, 2019. [7] H. Gang, L. Jiandong, and L. Donghua, “Study of modulation recogni-tion based on HOCs and SVM,” in 2004 IEEE 59th Vehicular Technology Conference. VTC 2004-Spring (IEEE Cat. No.04CH37514) , vol. 2, pp. 898–902 Vol.2, 2004. [8] S. Rajendran, W. Meert, D. Giustiniano, V. Lenders, and S. Pollin, “Deep Learning Models for Wireless Signal Classification With Dis-tributed Low-Cost Spectrum Sensors,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking , vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 433–445, 2018. [9] J. Xu, C. Luo, G. Parr, and Y. Luo, “A Spatiotemporal Multi-Channel Learning Framework for Automatic Modulation Recognition,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters , vol. 9, no. 10, pp. 1629–1632, 2020. [10] A. P. Hermawan, R. R. Ginanjar, D.-S. Kim, and J.-M. Lee, “CNN-Based Automatic Modulation Classification for Beyond 5G Communications,” 

IEEE Communications Letters , vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 1038–1041, 2020. [11] J. N. Njoku, M. E. Morocho-Cayamcela, and W. Lim, “CGDNet: Effi-cient Hybrid Deep Learning Model for Robust Automatic Modulation Recognition,” IEEE Networking Letters , vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 47–51, 2021. [12] M. Kulin, T. Kazaz, I. Moerman, and E. De Poorter, “End-to-End Learning From Spectrum Data: A Deep Learning Approach for Wire-less Signal Identification in Spectrum Monitoring Applications,” IEEE Access , vol. 6, pp. 18484–18501, 2018. [13] P. D. Choudhury, A. Bora, and K. K. Sarma, “Big Spectrum Data and Deep Learning Techniques for Cognitive Wireless Networks,” in Deep Learning and Neural Networks: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications (I. R. M. Association, ed.), pp. 994–1015, Hershey, PA, USA: IGI Global, 2020. [14] W. Guo, K. Yang, H.-G. Stratigopoulos, H. Aboushady, and K. N. Salama, “An End-to-End Neuromorphic Radio Classification System With an Efficient Sigma-Delta-Based Spike Encoding Scheme,” IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 1869–1881, 2024. [15] K. Jung, J. Woo, and S. Mukhopadhyay, “An On-chip Accelerator with Hybrid Machine Learning for Modulation Classification of Radio Frequency Signals,” in 2022 IEEE/MTT-S International Microwave Symposium - IMS 2022 , pp. 487–490, 2022. [16] S. Soltani, Y. E. Sagduyu, R. Hasan, K. Davaslioglu, H. Deng, and T. Erpek, “Real-Time and Embedded Deep Learning on FPGA for RF Signal Classification,” in MILCOM 2019 - 2019 IEEE Military Communications Conference (MILCOM) , pp. 1–6, 2019. [17] K. Jung, J. Woo, and S. Mukhopadhyay, “On-Chip Acceleration of RF Signal Modulation Classification With Short-Time Fourier Transform and Convolutional Neural Network,” IEEE Access , vol. 11, pp. 144051– 144063, 2023. [18] A. Emad, H. Mohamed, A. Farid, M. Hassan, R. Sayed, H. Aboushady, and H. Mostafa, “Deep Learning Modulation Recognition for RF Spec-trum Monitoring,” in 2021 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS) , pp. 1–5, 2021. [19] Z. Song, A. E. Abdelazim, P. Bazargan Sabet, F. Wajsb¨ urt, H.-G. Stratigopoulos, and H. Aboushady, “A Power-Efficient Attention-Infused CNN Hardware Accelerator for RF Spectrum Monitoring,” in 2025 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS) , pp. 1–5, 2025. [20] Y. Shen, Z. Wang, T. Wang, C. Gu, Z. Wen, Y. Shu, and C. Wang, “Hetero2Pipe: Pipelining Multi-DNN Inference on Heterogeneous Mo-bile Processors under Co-Execution Slowdown,” in 2025 IEEE 45th International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS) ,pp. 483–493, 2025. [21] S. Peng, H. Jiang, H. Wang, H. Alwageed, Y. Zhou, M. M. Sebdani, and Y.-D. Yao, “Modulation Classification Based on Signal Constellation Diagrams and Deep Learning,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 718–727, 2019. [22] F. Liu, Z. Zhang, and R. Zhou, “Automatic modulation recognition based on CNN and GRU,” Tsinghua Science and Technology , vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 422–431, 2022. [23] Z. Liang, M. Tao, L. Wang, J. Su, and X. Yang, “Automatic Modulation Recognition Based on Adaptive Attention Mechanism and ResNeXt WSL Model,” IEEE Communications Letters , vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 2953– 2957, 2021. [24] Z. Ke and H. Vikalo, “Real-Time Radio Modulation Classification With An LSTM Auto-Encoder,” in ICASSP 2021 - 2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) ,pp. 4935–4939, 2021. [25] F. Zhang, C. Luo, J. Xu, Y. Luo, and F.-C. Zheng, “Deep learning based automatic modulation recognition: Models, datasets, and challenges,” 

Digital Signal Processing , vol. 129, p. 103650, 2022. [26] H. Wang, Z. Qi, Z. Li, and X. Zhao, “MR-Transformer: FPGA Acceler-ated Deep Learning Attention Model for Modulation Recognition,” IEEE 14 

Transactions on Wireless Communications , vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1221– 1233, 2025. [27] T. J. O’Shea, T. Roy, and T. C. Clancy, “Over-the-Air Deep Learning Based Radio Signal Classification,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing , vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 168–179, 2018. [28] C. J. Swinney and J. C. Woods, “Raw IQ Dataset for GNSS GPS Jamming Signal Classification,” Zenodo , 2021. [29] Y. Yu, X. Si, C. Hu, and J. Zhang, “A Review of Recurrent Neural Net-works: LSTM Cells and Network Architectures,” Neural Computation ,vol. 31, pp. 1235–1270, 07 2019. [30] A. V. et al., “Attention is All You Need,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, eds.), vol. 30, Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. [31] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weissenborn, X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly, J. Uszkoreit, and N. Houlsby, “An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Trans-formers for Image Recognition at Scale,” in International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. [32] Z. Liu, Y. Lin, Y. Cao, H. Hu, Y. Wei, Z. Zhang, S. Lin, and B. Guo, “Swin Transformer: Hierarchical Vision Transformer using Shifted Win-dows,” in 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pp. 9992–10002, 2021. [33] M. Sandler, A. Howard, M. Zhu, A. Zhmoginov, and L.-C. Chen, “MobileNetV2: Inverted Residuals and Linear Bottlenecks,” in 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 4510–4520, 2018. [34] A. H. et al., “Searching for MobileNetV3,” in 2019 IEEE/CVF Interna-tional Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pp. 1314–1324, 2019. [35] X. Zhang, T. Ge, and z. Chen, “Automatic Modulation Recognition of Communication Signals Based on Instantaneous Statistical Character-istics and SVM Classifier,” in 2018 IEEE Asia-Pacific Conference on Antennas and Propagation (APCAP) , pp. 344–346, 2018. [36] J. L. Xu, W. Su, and M. Zhou, “Likelihood-Ratio Approaches to Automatic Modulation Classification,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews) , vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 455–469, 2011. [37] B. Dulek, “Online Hybrid Likelihood Based Modulation Classification Using Multiple Sensors,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communica-tions , vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 4984–5000, 2017. [38] L. Y. Uys, M. Gouws, J. J. Strydom, and A. S. J. Helberg, “The Performance of Feature-based Classification of Digital Modulations Under Varying SNR and Fading Channel Conditions,” in 2017 IEEE AFRICON , pp. 198–203, 2017. [39] T. J. O’Shea, J. Corgan, and T. C. Clancy, “Convolutional radio modulation recognition networks,” in Proc. Engineering Applications of Neural Networks (EANN) , (Cham), pp. 213–226, Springer International Publishing, 2016. [40] X. Liu, D. Yang, and A. E. Gamal, “Deep Neural Network Architectures for Modulation Classification,” in 2017 51st Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems, and Computers , pp. 915–919, 2017. [41] F. Zhang, C. Luo, J. Xu, and Y. Luo, “An Efficient Deep Learning Model for Automatic Modulation Recognition Based on Parameter Estimation and Transformation,” IEEE Communications Letters , vol. 25, no. 10, pp. 3287–3290, 2021. [42] N. Kiyavash, F. Koushanfar, T. P. Coleman, and M. Rodrigues, “A Tim-ing Channel Spyware for the CSMA/CA Protocol,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security , vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 477–487, 2013. [43] Y. Liu, Y. Jin, A. Nosratinia, and Y. Makris, “Silicon Demonstration of Hardware Trojan Design and Detection in Wireless Cryptographic ICs,” 

IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems ,vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 1506–1519, 2017. [44] K. S. Subramani, N. Helal, A. Antonopoulos, A. Nosratinia, and Y. Makris, “Amplitude-Modulating Analog/RF Hardware Trojans in Wireless Networks: Risks and Remedies,” IEEE Transactions on In-formation Forensics and Security , vol. 15, pp. 3497–3510, 2020. [45] Y. Liu, G. Volanis, K. Huang, and Y. Makris, “Concurrent hardware Tro-jan detection in wireless cryptographic ICs,” in 2015 IEEE International Test Conference (ITC) , pp. 1–8, 2015. [46] A. Dutta, D. Saha, D. Grunwald, and D. Sicker, “Secret Agent Radio: Covert Communication through Dirty Constellations,” in Information Hiding (M. Kirchner and D. Ghosal, eds.), (Berlin, Heidelberg), pp. 160– 175, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013. [47] J. Classen, M. Schulz, and M. Hollick, “Practical covert channels for wifi systems,” in 2015 IEEE Conference on Communications and Network Security (CNS) , pp. 209–217, 2015. [48] A. R. D´ ıaz-Rizo, H. Aboushady, and H.-G. Stratigopoulos, “Leaking wireless ics via hardware trojan-infected synchronization,” IEEE Trans-actions on Dependable and Secure Computing , vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 3845– 3859, 2023. [49] A. E. Abdelazim, A. R. Diaz-Rizo, H. Aboushady, and H.-G. Stratigopoulos, “AI-enabled covert channel detection in RF receiver architectures,” arXiv:2604.14987 , 2026. [50] J. Xu, S. Ying, and H. Li, “GPS Interference Signal Recognition Based on Machine Learning,” Mob. Netw. Appl. , vol. 25, p. 2336–2350, Dec. 2020. [51] P. Gao, S. Sun, Z. Zeng, and C. Wang, “GNSS Spoofing Jamming Recognition Based on Machine Learning,” in Signal and Information Processing, Networking and Computers (S. Sun, N. Chen, and T. Tian, eds.), (Singapore), pp. 221–228, Springer Singapore, 2018. [52] O. Sharifi-Tehrani, M. F. Sabahi, and M. Raees Danaee, “Efficient GNSS Jamming Mitigation Using the Marcenko Pastur Law and Karhunen–Loeve Decomposition,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems , vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 2291–2303, 2022. [53] F. Abdullayeva and O. Valikhanli, “Multimodal deep neural network for UAV GPS jamming attack detection,” Cyber Security and Applications ,vol. 3, p. 100094, 2025. [54] Y. Dang, A. Karakoc, S. Norshahida, and R. J¨ antti, “3D Radio Map-Based GPS Spoofing Detection and Mitigation for Cellular-Connected UAVs,” IEEE Transactions on Machine Learning in Communications and Networking , vol. 1, pp. 313–327, 2023. [55] A. Iqbal, M. N. Aman, and B. Sikdar, “A Deep Learning Based Induced GNSS Spoof Detection Framework,” IEEE Transactions on Machine Learning in Communications and Networking , vol. 2, pp. 457–478, 2024. [56] S. Bertram, L. Eisentraut, and R. Buettner, “A Systematic Literature Review of Current Machine Learning Approaches for Detecting GNSS Spoofing Attacks,” IEEE Access , vol. 13, pp. 108898–108917, 2025. [57] Z. Song, Y. Zhang, and A. A. R. M. A. Ebayyeh, “EDNet: Edge-Optimized Small Target Detection in UAV Imagery - Faster Context Attention, Better Feature Fusion, and Hardware Acceleration,” in 21st IEEE International Conference on Ubiquitous Intelligence and Comput-ing (UIC) - 2024 IEEE Smart World Congress (SWC) , pp. 829–838, 2024. [58] C. Hou, D. Fu, Z. Zhou, and X. Wu, “A Deep Learning-Based Multi-Signal Radio Spectrum Monitoring Method for UAV Communication,” 

Drones , vol. 7, no. 8, 2023. [59] S. Tridgell, D. Boland, P. H. Leong, R. Kastner, A. Khodamoradi, and Siddhartha, “Real-time Automatic Modulation Classification using RF-SoC,” in 2020 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium Workshops (IPDPSW) , pp. 82–89, 2020. [60] H. den Boer, R. Muller, S. Wong, and V. Voogt, “FPGA-based Deep Learning Accelerator for RF Applications,” in MILCOM 2021 - 2021 IEEE Military Communications Conference (MILCOM) , pp. 751–756, 2021. [61] J. Woo, K. Jung, and S. Mukhopadhyay, “Efficient On-chip Acceleration of Machine Learning Models for Detection of RF Signal Modulation,” in 

2021 IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium (IMS) , pp. 74– 77, 2021. [62] F. Jentzsch, Y. Umuroglu, A. Pappalardo, M. Blott, and M. Platzner, “RadioML Meets FINN: Enabling Future RF Applications With FPGA Streaming Architectures,” IEEE Micro , vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 125–133, 2022. [63] K. Zhang, B. Gao, B. Yang, Y. Ji, F. Gao, and Y. Li, “Real-Time Automatic Modulation Recognition Based on FPGA,” in 2023 9th International Conference on Computer and Communications (ICCC) ,pp. 1440–1444, 2023. [64] K. Yang, L. Zhang, A. M. Eltawil, and K. N. Salama, “Sparsity-aware streaming snn accelerator with output-channel dataflow for automatic modulation classification,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Artificial Intelligence , pp. 1–14, 2026. [65] J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun, “Squeeze-and-Excitation Networks,” in 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pp. 7132–7141, 2018. [66] M. Gomes, R. Righi, C. Andr´ e da Costa, and D. Griebler, “Steam++ an extensible end-to-end framework for developing iot data processing applications in the fog,” International Journal of Computer Science and Information Technology , vol. 14, pp. 31–51, 02 2022. [67] S. Mehta and M. Rastegari, “Separable Self-Attention for Mobile Vision Transformers,” Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2023.