Title: ComHymba: Low-Complexity Domain-Informed Foundation Model for Wireless Communications

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.23468v1

Published Time: Mon, 25 May 2026 00:45:45 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
> 1

# ComHymba: Low-Complexity Domain-Informed Foundation Model for Wireless Communications 

Bowen Yang, Wei Chen, Senior Member, IEEE, Jiaming Cheng, Bo Ai, Fellow, IEEE 

Abstract —Wireless foundation models are a promising route to unify channel reconstruction, sensing, and beam management in future wireless communication systems, but existing designs often inherit LLM-style Transformers with quadratic token com-plexity and weak integration of propagation priors. This paper proposes ComHymba, a domain-informed wireless foundation model built on an asymmetric masked autoencoder for large-scale self-supervised pre-training on Channel State Information (CSI). ComHymba introduces (i) 3D spatio-temporal-frequency patchification with rotary positional embedding, (ii) domain-informed masking strategies that emulate realistic CSI sparsity and fading patterns, and (iii) a decoupled amplitude–phase weighted objective tailored to channel statistics. Architecturally, we employ Hymba blocks that fuse windowed self-attention with state space models (SSMs), enabling linear-time modeling with respect to the overall channel input size. Experiments on eight downstream tasks spanning channel state information reconstruction, environmental sensing, and beam management show consistent accuracy gains over strong task-specific baselines, together with up to a 3.3× inference speedup versus Transformer backbones. Overall, ComHymba provides a scalable and efficient backbone for AI-native physical-layer intelligence. 

Index Terms —6G, wireless foundation model, CSI, masked autoencoder, low complexity 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# THE wireless system is entering the sixth-generation (6G) era, where the physical layer is expected to evolve from a pure “bit-pipe” into a native platform that jointly supports communications, high-resolution sensing, ubiquitous position-ing, and intelligent network operation [1]–[3]. This vision fundamentally enlarges the design space: future networks must handle heterogeneous services and rapidly changing propa-gation conditions, while processing high-dimensional channel state information (CSI) produced by wideband signals and extremely large antenna arrays. As a result, physical-layer tasks such as channel reconstruction, beam management, envi-ronment perception, and mobility-aware optimization become tightly coupled and must be executed under stringent real-time and edge-computing constraints. In this context, building and maintaining isolated, task-specific pipelines is increasingly inefficient, since it duplicates feature extraction, limits cross-task knowledge reuse, and incurs substantial training, storage, and deployment overhead [4], [5]. This growing complexity is pushing wireless research to-ward AI-native solutions. Classical model-based designs rely 

Bowen Yang, Wei Chen, Jiaming Cheng, and Bo Ai are with the School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beijing Jiaotong University, China (email: {22331171, weich, jiamingcheng, boai }@bjtu.edu.cn). 

on simplified analytical assumptions, yet their accuracy de-grades in high-frequency, strongly non-stationary, and site-specific channels, leading to pronounced model mismatch [6]. Data-driven deep learning (DL) methods can better capture such non-linearities [7], but most are still trained in a su-pervised, per-task manner and thus generalize poorly beyond the training distribution [8], [9]. Inspired by the success of large models in other domains, an emerging direction is to pre-train large-scale, self-supervised wireless models that learn transferable representations from massive unlabeled CSI, and then adapt them to diverse downstream tasks with lightweight fine-tuning. Such a “wireless foundation model” (WFM) per-spective promises a unified intelligence backbone for the physical layer, while simultaneously raising new challenges in architecture efficiency and in embedding radio-domain physical priors [10], [11]. Building on this WFM perspective, recent studies have begun to explore large-scale self-supervised pre-training for wireless communications, drawing inspiration from the pre-train–fine-tune paradigm of large language models (LLMs) [12], [13]. By learning from massive unlabeled channel observations, a WFM aims to acquire transferable representations of the wireless environment that can be adapted to heterogeneous downstream tasks with minimal task-specific modification. A key insight is that the wireless channel itself is the shared physical substrate underpinning both communi-cation and sensing [14]. Rather than being a mere collection of numerical entries, CSI serves as a high-fidelity physical carrier that reflects the interaction between electromagnetic waves and the surrounding environment, including geometry, materials, and terminal dynamics. Grounding the founda-tion model on channel representations therefore encourages the learned features to respect underlying propagation laws, yielding a physically consistent and unified intelligence base that can generalize across frequencies, scenarios, and system configurations. Motivated by the channel-centric view above, a series of early WFMs have been proposed to pursue universal intelli-gence for the physical layer [15]–[19]. While these attempts validate the promise of large-scale self-supervised pre-training, most existing designs still inherit LLM-style architectures and objectives, without being fully tailored to the computa-tional and domain-specific characteristics of wireless channels. First, their computational footprint often prevents real-time edge deployment. Mainstream WFMs typically adopt standard Transformers, incurring quadratic complexity O(L2) with the token sequence length L [20]; when facing high-dimensional CSI and extremely large antenna arrays, this “computational 

> arXiv:2605.23468v1 [eess.SP] 22 May 2026 2

Channel -related wireless communication tasks       

> pilot
> CSI Estimated CSI
> Channel estimation Channel prediction
> 𝐶𝑆𝐼 t𝐶𝑆𝐼 𝑡 +1
> FDD up link to downlink inference
> DL CSI
> UL CSI
> LoS/NLoS identification
> LOS
> Link status: NLOS
> Scenario identification Pathloss prediction
> Distance
> Pathloss(dB)
> User localization
> Sub -6G to mmWave
> beam selection

Pretrained ComHymba wireless foundation model 

Large -scale channel datasets 

Universal representation  

> Training
> Capturing
> Fig. 1. ComHymba for channel-related downstream wireless communication tasks.

wall” leads to prohibitive training cost and inference latency. Second, the learning criteria are frequently agnostic to radio propagation mechanisms and domain insights. Simply reusing random masking and generic statistical losses makes it difficult to capture the inherent correlations across time, frequency, and space, and it overlooks the distinct roles of amplitude and phase (energy distribution versus structural propagation patterns). Without explicitly embedding such channel-centric domain priors into both architecture and pre-training objective, WFMs are unlikely to deliver high-fidelity and robust physical-layer intelligence across diverse wireless scenarios. To address the above efficiency and domain-misalignment issues, we propose ComHymba, a low-complexity, domain-informed wireless channel foundation model. ComHymba is built upon a masked autoencoder pre-training framework [21] and adopts Hymba blocks [22] that couple windowed atten-tion [23] with state space models (SSMs) [24]. This hybrid backbone alleviates the Transformer-induced “computational wall” by enabling linear-time modeling with respect to the overall channel sequence length, thereby reducing training cost and inference latency for real-time edge deployment. On the learning side, we tailor the entire pre-training pipeline to wireless CSI: (i) a 3D spatio-temporal-frequency patchification and rotary positional encoding to preserve structured cor-relations, (ii) domain-specific masking schemes (dimension-specific, block-wise, and pilot-pattern) to capture multi-scale cross-dimensional channel correlations, and (iii) a decoupled amplitude–phase weighted objective that combines MSE with energy- and channel-structure-sensitive terms. Together, these designs steer the model to learn representations that are both computationally scalable and domain-consistent, forming a solid foundation for general-purpose physical-layer intelli-gence. We validate ComHymba through extensive experiments on eight channel-related downstream tasks spanning three domains: channel reconstruction, environmental sensing, and beam management, as summarized in Fig. 1. The results show that ComHymba consistently improves accuracy and robustness over strong task-specific and WFM baselines, while preserving high computational efficiency for practical deploy-ment. The main contributions are summarized as follows:  

> •

Linear-complexity hybrid backbone: We propose ComHymba, a low-complexity WFM that combines masked autoencoder pre-training with Hymba blocks, which couple windowed attention and state space models (SSMs). This design reduces the computational complex-ity from the Transformer’s quadratic cost to linear scaling 

O(L) with sequence length, enabling efficient long-CSI modeling for real-time edge deployment.  

> •

Domain-informed CSI pre-training pipeline: We in-troduce a wireless-tailored pre-training recipe that injects domain priors into representation learning, including 3D spatio-temporal-frequency patchification with rotary posi-tional embedding, domain-specific masking (dimension-specific, block-wise, and pilot-pattern), and a decoupled amplitude–phase weighted objective that augments MSE with energy- and channel-structure-sensitive terms.  

> •

Broad evaluation across multi-task wireless bench-marks: We evaluate ComHymba on eight representative downstream tasks covering channel reconstruction, envi-3

ronmental sensing, and beam management. Results show consistent gains in accuracy/robustness with favorable efficiency compared with strong task-specific baselines, supporting ComHymba as a unified backbone for diverse physical-layer tasks. 

Notation: Throughout this paper, we employ the follow-ing notation. Boldface italic letters denote tensors, matrices, or vectors. Subscripts are used to indicate indices within specific dimensions, patches, or sets (e.g., Hi, Ωmask ). The superscripts (·)T and (·)H represent the transpose and conju-gate transpose, respectively, while ⊙ denotes the Hadamard (element-wise) product. C and R signify the complex and real domains, with the imaginary unit denoted by j = √−1. We use | · | , ∠(·), and ∥ · ∥ F to represent the element-wise absolute value, phase angle, and Frobenius norm, respectively. Square brackets [·, ·] are employed for the concatenation of vectors or feature sequences. Additionally, T (·) and Φ denote the complex-to-real transformation and the 3D slicing operator, while O(·) characterizes the computational complexity. II. S YSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION 

This section presents the system model and learning formu-lation of ComHymba. We first introduce the underlying wire-less channel model and organize CSI into a structured spatio-temporal-frequency tensor representation suitable for large-scale pre-training. We then present a generalized masking– reconstruction objective that casts universal feature learning as an information recovery problem over the multi-dimensional channel index space, providing the mathematical basis for domain-informed self-supervised representation learning. 

A. Physical Channel Modeling 

We consider heterogeneous propagation conditions and gen-erate CSI using the standardized geometry-based stochastic model (GBSM) in 3GPP TR 38.901 [25]. This provides a physically grounded data source for pre-training. At a given time instant t and absolute subcarrier fre-quency f , the narrowband frequency-domain multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) channel is represented by the matrix 

H(t, f ) ∈ CNrx ×Ntx , where Ntx /Nrx are the transmit/receive antenna counts, and modeled as a superposition of P multipath components: 

H(t, f ) = 

> P

X

> p=1

gp arx 

 θrx  

> p

, ϕ rx 

> p



aH

> tx

 θtx  

> p

, ϕ tx 

> p

 e−j2πf τ p ej2πν pt,

(1) where gp is the complex path gain, (θtx  

> p

, ϕ tx  

> p

) and (θrx  

> p

, ϕ rx  

> p

)

denote the azimuth/elevation angles of departure and arrival, and τp and νp are the delay and Doppler shift, respectively. The transmit/receive spatial responses are captured by uniform planar array (UPA) steering vectors, which we express via a separable Kronecker structure: 

a(θ, ϕ ) = ah(θ, ϕ ) ⊗ av (ϕ). (2) This model makes explicit the coupled structure of CSI across time evolution (Doppler), frequency selectivity (delay), and spatial manifolds (array responses), which ComHymba aims to learn in a unified representation. 

B. Multi-Dimensional Tensor Representation 

To expose the inherent structure of CSI for self-supervised pre-training, we stack consecutive channel snapshots over time and frequency into a four-dimensional complex tensor 

H ∈ CL×K×Ntx ×Nrx , where L and K denote the numbers of time samples and subcarriers, respectively. This representa-tion explicitly aligns the temporal, spectral, and spatial axes, allowing the model to capture cross-domain correlations (e.g., Doppler-induced temporal dynamics, delay-induced frequency selectivity, and array-manifold structure) in a unified manner. Since most deep learning operators are implemented in the real domain, we apply a complex-to-real mapping T (·) and form a real-valued tensor X by concatenating the real and imaginary parts along an additional channel dimension: 

X = T (H) ∈ RL×K×Ns×2, (3) where Ns = Ntx × Nrx denotes the aggregated spatial degrees of freedom. This conversion preserves the full complex infor-mation of CSI while providing a standardized input format for 3D patchification and masking–reconstruction learning. 

C. Multi-Domain CSI Masking and Reconstruction Frame-work 

We formulate domain-informed representation learning as a self-supervised masking–reconstruction problem over a multi-dimensional CSI index space. Let I denote the complete index set of the real-valued CSI tensor X ∈ RL×K×Ns×2:

I = {(t, f, s, c ) | 1 ≤ t ≤ L, 1 ≤ f ≤ K, 

1 ≤ s ≤ Ns, c ∈ { 1, 2}} . (4) During pre-training, a masking operator M partitions I into the observed set Ωobs and the masked set Ωmask (with Ωobs ∪

Ωmask = I and Ωobs ∩ Ωmask = ∅). The model input is the partially observed CSI 

Xobs = {xi | i ∈ Ωobs }, (5) and the foundation model fθ is trained to predict the missing components on Ωmask by leveraging structured dependencies in Ωobs , including temporal dynamics induced by Doppler, frequency correlations induced by multipath delays, and spatial correlations induced by array manifolds. This masking–reconstruction objective turns pre-training into a domain-consistent inference task: by hiding a subset of spatio-temporal-frequency samples, the model is forced to internalize the joint distribution of CSI across domains, rather than memorizing task-specific input–output mappings. As a result, the learned representation becomes robust to practical imperfections such as sparse pilots, irregular sampling, and partial blockages, providing a principled foundation for uni-versal adaptation to diverse downstream communication-and-sensing tasks. 4Patch & 

Linear Projection  

> 1

3D Rotary 

Positional Embedding  

> 2

Domain -Informed 

Masking   

> 3Hymba -MAE
> Parallel Architecture
> 4Reconstruction
> (Output)
> 5

Real -valued CSI tensor 

> Time
> Frequency

3D slicing by 

coherence intervals   

> 𝑝𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ 1𝑝𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ 2𝑝𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ 𝑛

Flatten 

Linear projection 

Patch’s original coordinates 

(𝑡 𝑖 , 𝑓 𝑖 , 𝑠 𝑖  )     

> Time
> Split embedding dimension
> 𝐷 =𝐷 𝑡 +𝐷 𝑓 +𝐷 𝑠 (each = 𝐷 /3)
> Time
> subspace
> RoPE
> Freq
> subspace
> RoPE
> Space
> subspace
> RoPE

Rotary positional embedding    

> 𝑥 1𝑥 1
> 𝑥 2
> 𝑥 1
> 𝑥 2𝑥 2
> θfθ𝑡 θ𝑠
> (a) Random
> (b) Dimension
> (c) Pilot pattern
> (d) Fading block

Domain  informed index 

Set  Ωmask       

> kept
> padded
> masked
> Visible tokens
> Full tokens
> (128 learnable)
> Concat with meta tokens
> Proj & spilt
> Window
> Attention
> branch
> QKV
> SSM
> branch
> Gate
> SSM
> Norm Norm
> Proj
> Concat & Align
> Encoder (Hymba Blocks)
> Padding
> tokens Hymba

Lightweight decoder 

+

> Time
> Frequency

Reconstructed CSI  

> Fig. 2. The overall architecture of the proposed ComHymba framework, featuring 3D patchification, domain-informed masking, and the Hymba backbone for wireless channel representation learning.

III. T HE PROPOSED COM HYMBA FRAMEWORK 

This section presents the ComHymba framework in de-tail, including both the wireless-tailored pre-training pipeline and the efficient hybrid backbone. As shown in Fig. 2, ComHymba first converts raw CSI into structured spatio-temporal-frequency tokens via 3D patchification, structural embedding, and domain-specific masking, and then performs asymmetric masked reconstruction using a Hymba-based masked autoencoder architecture. By combining reconstruc-tion with linear-complexity sequence modeling, the proposed framework is able to learn domain-consistent channel repre-sentations while remaining scalable for long-CSI processing in edge deployments. The key components are described in the following subsections. 

A. Spatio-Temporal-Frequency Patchification and Channel Structure Embedding 

Directly ingesting raw CSI samples into a large model is inefficient and often counterproductive. The real-valued CSI tensor X ∈ RL×K×Ns×2 is extremely high-dimensional; if each scalar entry is treated as an independent token, the sequence length grows as L × K × Ns, rapidly violating the memory and latency constraints of edge deployment. Mean-while, such point-wise tokenization amplifies measurement noise and fragments the inherent channel organization (e.g., locally stationary time–frequency regions and spatial coher-ence), which hinders learning stable spatio-temporal-frequency representations. To address these issues, we perform spatio-temporal-frequency patchification on the real-valued CSI tensor using a propagation-aware 3D slicing scheme. Let PL, PK , and 

Ps denote the patch sizes along the time, frequency, and spatial axes, respectively. Since CSI exhibits approximate local stationarity within a small neighborhood in this 3D grid, we define a slicing operator Φ that partitions X into a set of non-overlapping 3D patches. Compared with point-wise tokenization, this structured partitioning suppresses trivial sample-level perturbations and encourages the model to learn the coherent evolution of local resource blocks, where each patch serves as a compact channel descriptor summarizing local propagation characteristics. This patchification strategy benefits both efficiency and representation learning. From a computational perspective, aggregating PL × PK × Ps samples into one token shortens the input sequence by the same factor, thereby reducing the cost of modeling long-range dependencies. From a domain perspective, operating at the patch level mitigates sample-wise noise and encourages the model to encode structured propagation patterns (rather than isolated fluctuations). In implementation, each 3D patch is flattened and projected into a D-dimensional embedding via a linear layer: 

zi = Linear (Flatten (Patch i)) ∈ RD . (6) In summary, the proposed spatio-temporal-frequency 3D patchification leverages channel local stationarity to produce a compact token sequence for efficient processing, enabling 5

transferable representation learning with strong domain con-sistency in pre-training. 

B. Spatio-Temporal-Frequency 3D Positional Encoding 

For physical-layer channel modeling, it is crucial to preserve the topological relationships among patches in the original spatio-temporal-frequency grid. However, the masking oper-ation yields a discontinuous observation set, making absolute indexing unreliable and weakening the model’s ability to reason about relative geometry. To remedy this, we introduce a Spatio-Temporal-Frequency 3D Positional Encoding based on rotary positional embedding (RoPE). Each patch token is associated with its pre-masking 3D coordinate (ti, f i, s i), en-abling the encoder to retain relative displacement cues across time, frequency, and space even under partial observations. The framework explicitly injects these coordinate positions into the feature vectors through rotational transformations in the complex domain. To achieve decoupled dimensional injection, the D-dimensional embedding vector is partitioned into three orthogonal subspaces corresponding to the time, frequency, and space axes, with the constraint that D must be divisible by 6. For each dimension, a rotation angle θ is generated based on the position index to transform the feature pairs. The frequency base parameter ωk is defined as: 

ωk = 10000 − 2kD/ 6 , k ∈ { 0, 1, . . . , D/ 6 − 1}. (7) For feature vectors, the rotation process is applied to two-dimensional scalar pairs within each dimensional subspace. For a specific axis, let pos ∈ { ti, f i, S i} denote the original coordinate of the i-th patch, and let x1,k and x2,k represent the k-th pair of scalar elements in that subspace. The rotation transformation is formulated as follows: 

x′

> 1,k

x′

> 2,k



=

cos( pos · ωk) − sin( pos · ωk)sin( pos · ωk) cos( pos · ωk)

  x1,k 

x2,k 



, (8) where x′ 

> 1,k

and x′ 

> 2,k

are the transformed feature components, and the rotation angle is implicitly driven by the patch coor-dinate pos scaled by the frequency parameter ωk.This explicit 3D positional injection leverages the dot-product invariance of RoPE, enabling the model to utilize structural constraints between residual sampling points to preserve channel structural integrity under extreme masking conditions, thereby achieving precise reconstruction of the original channel features. 

C. Asymmetric Parallel Hybrid Architecture Design 

This study proposes an asymmetric masked autoencoder architecture based on a parallel hybrid-head structure, utilizing the Hymba block as the core feature extraction unit. Compared with the currently mainstream models that directly stack Transformer operators, the methodological foundation of this architecture lies in the parallel decoupling and synergy of operators at the layer level. This design enables high-fidelity representation of complex radio physical characteristics in the latent space, aiming to significantly enhance computational speed while ensuring channel modeling accuracy. Unlike the single global attention mechanism in conventional Transformer stacking models, the Hymba block integrates attention and state space model heads in parallel within a single layer. This approach achieves linear computational complexity while enabling efficient representation of long-sequence channel data. 

1) Sequence Feature Embedding and Enhancement: In the embedding stage, the masked visible sampling sequence 

Xvis ∈ RLvis ×D is first projected into the latent space via a linear mapping layer. To enhance the model’s perception of global prior channel knowledge, 128 learnable Meta Tokens 

R are prepended to the sequence to form the enhanced input sequence ˜X. The feature flow process is expressed as: 

˜X = Concat ([ R, Linear (Xvis )]) . (9) The introduction of Meta Tokens serves not only as a carrier for intrinsic propagation priors but also as an attention “backstop” in the computational logic. By absorbing redundant weights generated by “forced attention,” these tokens effec-tively mitigate the attention drainage common in mainstream Transformer models, providing a stable global reference an-chor for subsequent parallel feature decoupling. 

2) Parallel Hybrid-Head Encoder Architecture: Inside the encoder, the enhanced sequence ˜X undergoes parallel splitting in the feature space through a high-dimensional projection layer to achieve explicit operator decoupling: 

[Xattn , Xssm , G] = Split (Proj ( ˜X)) , (10) where Xattn is split along the feature dimension to yield the Query ( Q), Key ( K), and Value ( V ) vectors, while Xssm and the gating signal G flow into the state-space branch. In the attention branch, the output is computed following the scaled dot-product attention mechanism: 

Y attn = Softmax QK T

√dk

!

V . (11) The attention head acts as “snapshot memory,” capturing microscopic phase fluctuations in the channel through precise alignment. Simultaneously, the parallel SSM branch utilizes the linear recursive properties of the Mamba-2 operator to model the dynamic evolution of features on the channel manifold. Its transformation flow is represented as: 

Y ssm = Gate (G) ⊙ SSM (Xssm ). (12) The SSM head functions as “fading memory,” extracting macroscopic propagation dynamics such as multipath evolu-tion through context summarization. To ensure mathematical stability during the fusion of heterogeneous branches, indepen-dent normalization is applied to each output before integration into the latent representation: 

Hlat = Proj (Norm (Y attn ) + Norm (Y ssm )) . (13) This parallel structure ensures the encoder can simultane-ously encapsulate high-resolution local details and robust long-range contextual information, significantly enhancing feature extraction completeness and processing efficiency. 6

3) Lightweight Decoder and Structured Channel Recon-struction: In the reconstruction stage, the framework leverages the design advantages of the asymmetric masked autoencoder by constructing a lightweight decoder to reduce redundant overhead. First, the extracted latent variables Hlat and learn-able mask tokens M are concatenated and precisely realigned based on the original 3D coordinate indices: 

Hfull = Align (Concat ([ Hlat , M ]) , Index 3D ). (14) This coordinate-aware realignment mechanism ensures the model initiates the reconstruction task at the correct coor-dinates on the channel manifold. The lightweight decoder then restores missing channel details through the following operation: ˆH = Decoder (Hfull ). (15) The decoder achieves a highly efficient structured recon-struction of the multi-dimensional wireless channel response, faithfully capturing its underlying radio characteristics. 

4) Analysis of Architectural Advantages: Mechanism of Linear Complexity and Precision Guarantee: The lineariza-tion of computational complexity primarily stems from the restructuring of the mathematical properties of the operators. Traditional self-attention mechanisms exhibit quadratic growth (O(L2)) in overhead relative to the sequence length L. In contrast, the proposed architecture employs a sliding window attention mechanism to restrict the search horizon of each point within a fixed width W , thereby decoupling the complex-ity to O(L). Simultaneously, the parallel SSM branch utilizes the linear recursive attributes of the Mamba-2 operator to mathematically ensure that the overall model maintains rapid inference capabilities when processing ultra-high-dimensional data, effectively circumventing computational deficits. In terms of precision guarantee, the architecture achieves multi-scale representation through the dual-stream synergy of “snapshot memory” and “long-range evolution.” The attention branch, acting as snapshot memory, captures instantaneous microscopic phase fluctuations and local spatial correlations via a precise alignment mechanism. Meanwhile, the parallel SSM branch serves as the primary engine for capturing long-range context; it utilizes the recurrent dynamic summarization capability of hidden states to transcend local window con-straints, extracting macroscopic propagation dynamics such as multipath evolution and environmental variations from long sequences. To further strengthen global stability, Meta Tokens function as “global anchors” and “attention backstops,” miti-gating attention dilution and assisting in the storage of global contextual summaries by providing fixed reference points that do not shift with the sequence. 

D. Domain-Specific Masking Strategy: Inducing Electromag-netic Intuition 

Distinct from the unbiased random masking patterns used in general vision or text tasks, the Domain-Specific Mask-ing scheme designed in this study is explicitly tailored to conform to the structural characteristics of wireless channels. This scheme moves beyond a purely random token-dropping paradigm by strategically constructing physically-consistent “blind spots” in the index space Ωmask . It forces the model to actively leverage physical gradients and environmental priors at the boundaries of the masked regions during the reconstruction process, thereby achieving a transition from simple numerical completion to deep physical interpolation. The specific strategies are as follows:  

> •

Multi-scale Random Masking: Random sampling is performed at high ratios. By destroying the global con-tinuity of the electromagnetic field on a large scale, the model is forced to learn deep joint statistical distributions across the temporal, spectral, and spatial dimensions.  

> •

Dimension-specific Masking: Independent masking is applied to specific dimensions, such as continuous tem-poral slots, spectral sub-bands, or antenna clusters. This strategy aims to cut off the information flow within a particular dimension, compelling the model to mine the inherent evolutionary patterns and physical correlations within that single dimension, thereby strengthening the model’s independent representation capability for dimen-sional features.  

> •

Pilot-Pattern Masking: Mimicking the periodic layout of reference signals (e.g., pilots) in communication sys-tems, this strategy executes equidistant comb-type or block-type masking. This forces the model to perform interpolation tasks akin to “channel estimation” during the pre-training phase, learning to restore a continuous electromagnetic field from discrete observations on the physical manifold.  

> •

Deep-Fading Block Masking: Volumetric masking in 3D space is introduced to simulate real-world obstacles and path loss. By removing contiguous “space blocks” to con-struct deep-fading scenarios, the model is compelled to utilize physical gradients from known regions to perform complex field reconstruction. These strategies elevate the pre-training objectives from mechanical data completion to the induction of physical in-tuition. This ensures that the learned features strictly adhere to electromagnetic propagation laws, laying a solid physical foundation for subsequent multi-task transfer. 

E. Domain-Informed Joint Loss Function Design 

The pre-training objective is formulated as a joint loss that couples distribution-level fidelity with radio-physics consis-tency (Fig. 3). We begin with a Statistical Loss Lstat to let the model learn the underlying channel statistics through masked reconstruction. Specifically, Lstat is the mean squared error (MSE) computed only over masked patches indexed by Ωmask :

Lstat = 1

|Ωmask |

X

> i∈Ωmask

1

|E i| ∥Hi − ˆHi∥2 

> F

, (16) where Hi and ˆHi are the ground-truth and reconstructed real-valued tensor streams of the i-th patch, respectively, 

∥ · ∥ F denotes the Frobenius norm, and |E i| is the number of sampling points in patch i.As training proceeds, we further inject Channel Physical Constraint Losses to explicitly regularize the reconstruction with respect to radio propagation principles, focusing on 7MSE 1 Statistical loss   

> Predicted Ground truth
> Minimize pixel -level
> numerical loss
> power

2 Amplitude consistency loss  

> Pred. Power GT. Power
> Minimize the difference
> of power(distribution)
> phase

3 Phase alignment loss  

> Pred. Phase GT. Phase
> Minimize the phase deviation
> by distance of complex vectors

Loss components  (computed on masked region)                   

> Statistical loss
> (λ1)
> Statistical only Training steps
> Relative weight
> Stage 1
> Learn distribution
> Stage 2
> Introduce physics
> Stage3
> Reach an equilibrium
> Physical loss
> (γ(t)·(λ2+λ3))
> Temporal Evolution of Loss Component Weights
> Joint loss function
> Statistical loss Amplitude loss Phase loss λ1γ𝑡 ·λ2γ𝑡 ·λ3
> Total loss
> Value Power Phase Difference
> Fig. 3. Design of the domain-informed joint loss function.

amplitude–frequency behavior and phase evolution. For this purpose, the reconstructed and reference patch tensors are first converted from their real-valued representations back to the complex domain, where physically meaningful magnitude and phase can be evaluated. The proposed physical constraints include two complementary terms: 

Amplitude (Energy) Consistency Loss Leng : This loss pe-nalizes deviations in the received-power distribution between the reconstructed and ground-truth channels. It is implemented by measuring, via the Frobenius norm, the element-wise differ-ence between the squared magnitudes of the complex-valued patch tensors, thereby encouraging the model to preserve large-scale effects such as path loss and shadowing: 

Leng = 1

|Ωmask |

X

> i∈Ωmask

1

|E i| ∥| Hi|2 − | ˆHi|2∥2 

> F

, (17) where the absolute value and squaring operations | · | 2 are ap-plied in an element-wise manner over the complex-represented tensors. 

Phase Alignment Accuracy Loss Lphase : This loss em-phasizes accurate recovery of wavefront geometry and spatial directivity encoded in the channel phase. To mitigate the discontinuity induced by phase wrapping within [−π, π ], we compare phases after mapping them onto the unit circle in the complex plane. The phase deviation is then measured by the Frobenius norm of the difference between the resulting unit-modulus complex tensors: 

Lphase = 1

|Ωmask |

X

> i∈Ωmask

1

|E i| ∥ej∠Hi − ej∠ ˆHi ∥2 

> F

, (18) where ∠(·) extracts the element-wise phase and ej(·) performs the corresponding unit-modulus complex embedding for each patch tensor. To improve optimization stability, we adopt a progressive strategy that introduces the physical constraints only after the model has learned a reliable statistical prior. Concretely, once training reaches a predefined plateau, the physical losses are activated through a scheduling factor γ(t) and merged into the overall objective. The resulting joint loss is 

Ltotal = λ1Lstat + γ(t) ( λ2Leng + λ3Lphase ) , (19) where γ(t) increases over time to gradually emphasize propagation-aware regularization, and λ1, λ 2, λ 3 are hyper-parameters that balance the three terms. This dual-guided objective helps ComHymba learn representations that are both statistically faithful and physically plausible, thereby benefit-ing downstream tasks. To clarify the execution of the entire training workflow, the detailed pre-training procedure of the proposed ComHymba framework—integrating data preprocessing, domain-informed masking, hybrid feature extraction, and physics-consistent reconstruction—is formally summarized in Algorithm 1. IV. E XPERIMENTS AND RESULTS ANALYSIS 

This section presents the experimental setup used to assess the representation learning capability and transferability of the proposed ComHymba foundation model. The evaluation pipeline is organized to mirror practical deployment, pro-gressing from dataset construction and pre-training to down-stream adaptation. Specifically, we first describe the hetero-geneous multi-scenario CSI corpus and the corresponding simulation/parameter settings. We then introduce the full pre-training recipe, including the optimization details and the joint statistical–physical objective. Finally, we transfer the pre-trained encoder to eight representative wireless downstream tasks spanning channel reconstruction, environmental sensing, 8

Algorithm 1 The ComHymba Framework Pre-training Proce-dure 

Input: Raw complex CSI tensor H ∈ CL×K×Ntx ×Nrx .

Output: Pre-trained ComHymba foundation model weights θ.

1: Stage I: Data Preprocessing 

2: Convert H to real-valued tensor X via transformation 

T (·).

3: Perform 3D slicing Φ to generate full 3D patches 

{P atch i}.

4: Map all patches to D-dimensional embeddings zi via Linear Projection. 

5: Inject 3D coordinates (ti, f i, s i) into zi via 3D RoPE. 

6: Stage II: Domain-Informed Masking 

7: Select a domain-specific masking strategy (e.g., Pilot-pattern, Deep-fading). 

8: Generate masked index set Ωmask and visible set Ωobs .

9: Retain only visible patches zvis = {zi | i ∈ Ωobs } as input sequence. 

10: for each training step do 

11: Stage III: Hybrid-Head Encoder 

12: Prepend Meta Tokens R to form enhanced sequence 

˜X = [ R, zvis ].

13: [Xattn , Xssm , G] = Split(Proj( ˜X)) .

14: Branch A (Attention): Compute Y attn via windowed self-attention to capture snapshot phase fluctuations. 

15: Branch B (SSM): Compute Y ssm via Mamba-2 recur-sive operator to capture long-range fading evolution. 

16: Gating & Fusion: Hlat = Proj(Norm( Y attn ) + Norm( Y ssm )) .

17: Stage IV: Consistency Reconstruction & Optimiza-tion 

18: Realign Hlat with learnable mask tokens M based on original 3D indices. 

19: Reconstruct complete channel state matrix ˆH using lightweight decoder. 

20: Update θ by minimizing Ltotal (Joint Statistical and Physical Losses). 

21: end for 

and beamforming. All results are reported with quantitative comparisons against task-specific baselines to demonstrate that 

ComHymba supports heterogeneous tasks within a unified architecture while delivering consistent performance gains. 

A. Dataset Configuration 

To evaluate the self-supervised pre-training effectiveness of 

ComHymba , we build a large-scale heterogeneous CSI corpus of 198.5 GB using the QuaDRiGa simulator [26] (Fig. 4). The corpus covers 33 representative propagation scenarios and follows 3GPP-compliant configurations to ensure physically grounded and reproducible channel statistics. The generated CSI preserves key propagation characteristics, including multi-path fading, delay profiles, and spatial correlation across antenna elements. To emulate realistic non-stationary envi-ronments, we sweep a wide range of carrier frequencies 198.5GB                       

> Massive channel dataset
> Scenario Diversity
> 123Spanning Sub -6GHz
> to mmWave Channels
> Diversity in
> User Mobility Speeds
> Sub -6GHz mmWave
> 2GHz 7GHz 28 GHz
> Sub -6GHz mmWave
> 0 km/h
> 3km/h
> 60 km/h
> 300 km/h
> Stationary
> Pedestrian
> Vehicle
> High -speed
> Rail
> Speed Range: 0–300 km/h
> Includes 33 classic
> communication scenarios
> Urban Rural
> Indoor HSR
> • Narrow
> bandwidth
> • Insensitive
> to obstacles
> • Robust
> NLoS links
> • Massive
> bandwidth
> •sensitive to
> obstacles
> • LoS
> dependency
> Simulating various
> user mobility states
> Quadriga
> Large/small -scale Fading
> Domain Characteristics
> Multi -dimensional Correlations
> Environment & Mobility Metadata
> • • •
> Spatial & Angular Manifolds

Fig. 4. Overview of the massive heterogeneous wireless channel dataset. The dataset comprises 198.5 GB of raw CSI data across 33 diverse scenarios, spanning a wide frequency range from sub-6GHz to mmWave and covering multi-level user mobility speeds from 0 to 300 km/h. 

(from sub-6 GHz to mmWave), antenna array geometries, and user mobility patterns/speeds, yielding channels with diverse spatiotemporal dynamics. This heterogeneous corpus provides a strong basis for learning scenario-invariant representations that can be transferred to downstream tasks in channel recon-struction, environmental sensing, and beamforming. 

B. Training Configuration and Masking Rate Schedule 

To stably pre-train ComHymba on the 198.5 GB heteroge-neous CSI corpus, we adopt a carefully tuned optimization protocol whose key hyperparameters are summarized in Ta-ble I. We use AdamW optimizer with a hybrid learning rate schedule, which initiates from a base learning rate of 1×10 −5

and undergoes linear warmup over the first 5% of the total training steps up to a peak value of 1 × 10 −4, followed by cosine annealing to 1 × 10 −6. Automatic mixed precision (AMP) is enabled throughout to reduce memory cost and accelerate convergence while preserving numerical stability for complex-valued channel representations. We further employ a curriculum-style masking schedule to gradually increase task difficulty. The masking ratios for multi-scale random masking, dimension-specific striping, and deep-fading block masking are linearly ramped from 50% to 75% across training, encouraging the model to first capture coarse time–frequency–spatial regularities and then learn more challenging cross-dimensional propagation dynamics under severe information sparsity. In contrast, pilot-pattern masking is kept fixed at a high-sparsity setting, retaining only one visible element within each local 2 × 2 × 2 cube as a reference signal along the time, frequency, and spatial axes. 

C. Downstream Task Adaptation and Performance Evaluation 

To quantitatively evaluate the transferability and generaliza-tion of ComHymba, we apply it to eight core downstream tasks 9                 

> TABLE I COM HYMBA PRE -TRAINING HYPERPARAMETERS .
> Hyperparameter Value
> Batch Size 128 Total Epochs 250 Optimizer AdamW Base Learning Rate 1×10 −5
> Max Learning Rate 1×10 −4
> Min Learning Rate 1×10 −6
> LR Schedule Linear Warmup + Cosine Annealing Warmup Ratio 5% of total steps

across three categories: channel reconstruction, environmental sensing, and beamforming. By attaching lightweight task-specific heads to the pre-trained encoder, we analyze the model’s effectiveness in handling diverse wireless physical layer dimensions. 

1) Model Configuration and Comparison Baselines: 

ComHymba is configured with approximately 100M param-eters, featuring an asymmetric architecture with a 20-layer encoder and a 4-layer decoder ( D = 504 ). To balance perfor-mance and overhead, it employs a hybrid attention mechanism: full attention is used in critical layers for global anchoring, while the remaining layers utilize lightweight local window attention for feature evolution. To comprehensively measure performance, the following representative models are introduced as baselines, including a foundation model of comparable scale:  

> •

Codebook: A pre-defined beam vector set based on standards, serving as a training-free physical performance benchmark for beamforming.  

> •

Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP): Simple and low-latency, but lacks perception of structural correlations. Used for FDD inference, path loss prediction, user local-ization, LoS/NLoS identification, and beamforming [27], [28].  

> •

Convolutional Neural Network (CNN): Excels at cap-turing local spatial and time-frequency features via pa-rameter sharing. Used for FDD inference, user localiza-tion, path loss prediction, LoS/NLoS identification, and scenario classification [29], [30].  

> •

RNN (LSTM/GRU): Specialized in modeling time-series characteristics and non-linear dynamics. Used for channel prediction, channel estimation [31], [32].  

> •

Transformer & WIT: Built on self-attention for global dependency modeling; WIT is specifically optimized for sensing. Used for channel prediction, user localization, and path loss prediction [33], [34].  

> •

LLM4CP: Serving as a foundation model baseline of comparable scale to ComHymba, this architecture is op-timized for communication sequences with high transfer potential. Used for channel prediction, channel estima-tion, FDD inference, scenario classification, and beam-forming [35], [36].  

> •

Helena: A deep learning architecture tailored for channel estimation, utilizing layer-wise optimizations for physical structure reconstruction [37]. 

2) Downstream Task Evaluation and Performance Anal-ysis: To validate the feature migration and generalization capabilities of the ComHymba foundation model, this section evaluates its performance across various downstream tasks. The evaluation logic follows a hierarchical progression from low-level signal restoration (micro-level) to environmental semantic extraction (mid-level) and finally to transmission decision control (macro-level). These comparative experiments aim to quantify the core advantages of ComHymba’s universal representations over raw observation data in the feature space. To ensure a rigorous quantitative evaluation, we define three key performance metrics across the downstream benchmarks:  

> •

Normalized Mean Squared Error (NMSE): Employed as the core evaluation metric for continuous channel reconstruction tasks to quantify the restoration fidelity. The mathematical formulation of the NMSE is defined as: NMSE = ∥Hgt − Hre ∥2

> F

∥Hgt ∥2

> F

, (20) where Hgt and Hre denote the ground-truth complex CSI tensor and the model’s reconstructed output tensor, respectively, and ∥ · ∥ F represents the Frobenius norm.  

> •

Mean Absolute Error (MAE): Used for environmental sensing spatial regression tasks, expressed as: MAE = 1

Ntest 

> Ntest

X

> n=1

|yn − ˆyn|, (21) where yn and ˆyn represent the target and predicted physical parameters for the n-th test sample, and Ntest 

denotes the total number of samples in the test set.  

> •

Classification Accuracy: Adopted for link-state identifi-cation, scenario classification, and top-K beam manage-ment choices, formalized as: Accuracy = 1

Ntest 

> Ntest

X

> n=1

I(ˆ cn ∈ C target  

> n

), (22) where ˆcn is the model’s predicted class or beam index, 

Ctarget  

> n

is the set of legitimate labels (or the top-K optimal beam set), and I(·) is the indicator function that outputs 

1 if the condition is true and 0 otherwise. The specific configurations and corresponding performance comparisons of the three task domains are thoroughly pre-sented as follows. 

a) Channel Reconstruction Tasks: The channel recon-struction tasks aim to verify the capability of the ComHymba foundation model in restoring the underlying physical mecha-nisms of wireless signals. To ensure the rigor of the evaluation, all sub-tasks in this section are constructed based on a unified OFDM system configuration: the center frequency is set to 

2.0 GHz, with a transmission bandwidth of 10 MHz and a sub-carrier spacing of 15 kHz. Regarding the antenna architecture, the base station is equipped with 32 physical antenna elements mapped to 8 logical ports via a specific coupling matrix, while the mobile terminal features 4 receiving antennas, thereby forming a complex 8 × 4 MIMO spatial observation model. Based on this system framework, we designed three core sub-tasks. 10          

> (a) Channel prediction performance under varying SNR levels.
> (b) Channel estimation performance under varying SNR levels. Fig. 5. NMSE performance versus SNR for in-band reconstruction tasks: (a) channel prediction and (b) channel estimation.
> Fig. 6. FDD Uplink-to-Downlink Inference: NMSE performance for cross-band mapping.
> •

The channel prediction task is designed to address the ”channel aging” problem. It requires the founda-tion model to decouple stable multipath evolution fea-tures from the universal representations generated by ComHymba and suppress cumulative prediction errors within extremely short coherence times, providing real-time link pre-compensation for the system.  

> •

The channel estimation task is the cornerstone of coherent demodulation. This task requires the model to utilize the time-frequency physical correlation priors learned during the pre-training phase to achieve precise completion of the fine manifold structure of the channel through the ”super-resolution” reconstruction capability of its internal representations, thereby significantly releasing spectrum resources occupied by pilots.  

> •

The FDD inference task is dedicated to breaking the chan-nel reciprocity mismatch. This inference is intended to verify ComHymba’s ability to extract universal features, thereby reconstructing downlink CSI without the need for downlink feedback to support efficient FDD downlink precoding. In channel reconstruction tasks, ComHymba demonstrates exceptional representation capabilities. For channel predic-tion (Fig. 5a), even under multi-step inference, ComHymba achieves a 10% –15% accuracy improvement across the entire SNR range compared to LLM4CP, reflecting its robustness in capturing non-linear dynamics. In channel estimation (Fig. 5b), under an extremely sparse 2.3% pilot density, its accuracy achieves a 60% leap over the task-specific Helena baseline, proving its power to transform cluttered raw samples into highly structured representations. Furthermore, in the FDD inference task (Fig. 6), facing asymmetric high-dimensional mapping, ComHymba delivers a performance gain of over 

15% compared to traditional models, validating its generaliza-tion ability to extract frequency-independent physical essences for precise cross-band inference. 

b) Environmental Sensing Tasks: The environmental sensing tasks are designed to verify whether the ComHymba foundation model can extract macro-level spatial semantics from underlying physical signals. Based on this physical foundation, four specific sub-tasks are designed:  

> •

The user localization task maps micro-phase differences in the beam and frequency domains to macro-level Euclidean coordinates. This task verifies whether the features refined by ComHymba possess the high spatial resolution required for centimeter-level localization.  

> •

The path loss prediction task requires the model to accurately predict the total power attenuation based on channel features. By leveraging ComHymba’s strong denoising capability, the model extracts stable large-scale attenuation trends from instantaneous channel data contaminated by severe fast-fading fluctuations, assisting the base station in optimizing real-time power allocation.  

> •

The LoS/NLoS identification task tests the model’s ability to distinguish different propagation modes and verifies if ComHymba’s representations capture a deep understand-11    

> (a) MAE for 3D user localization. (b) MAE for Path Loss Prediction.
> (c) Classification accuracy across LoS/NLoS identification. (d) Classification accuracy across diverse wireless scenarios. Fig. 7. Experimental results for environmental sensing tasks, including spatial regression and semantic classification.

ing of propagation path integrity.  

> •

The scenario identification task requires the model to cat-egorize the specific wireless propagation environments, thereby verifying its capability to extract high-level se-mantic abstractions from physical channel responses. Across sensing tasks, ComHymba demonstrates prominent advantages. In regression (Fig. 7a, Fig. 7b), it achieves a local-ization MAE of 0.054 m (a 46% gain over WIT’s 0.100 m) and a path loss MAE of 0.087 dB (outperforming WIT’s 0.110 dB), validating its superior feature denoising and manifold align-ment. In classification (Fig. 7c, Fig. 7d), ComHymba yields a 0.97 LoS identification accuracy (surpassing LLM4CP’s 0.94 and CNN’s 0.75) and tops scenario classification at 0.74 (versus LLM4CP’s 0.65 and MLP’s 0.58). These results confirm that ComHymba captures the implicit environmental scattering topology, rendering its universal representations a robust semantic descriptor. 

c) Beam Management: In millimeter-wave (mmWave) communications, traditional exhaustive beam sweeping schemes face significant challenges regarding signaling overhead and latency due to the extremely high dimensionality of the beam space and the susceptibility of channels to environmental blockages. Existing literature [38] has pointed out the possibility of utilizing sub-6 GHz channel information to predict mmWave frequency beams. The physical foundation of this concept lies in spatial congruency; although fading characteristics vary across frequency bands, the dominant geometric propagation paths, such as the angle-of-arrival and angle-of-departure, exhibit strong cross-band correlation within the same physical environment. The ComHymba framework is built upon this physical mechanism, achieving precise prediction of optimal mmWave beams by extracting intrinsic spatial features from sub-6 GHz matrices. Specifically, the beam management task requires retriev-ing the optimal beam weight vector wt from a predefined codebook W ∈ CNv ×Nc . To meet the requirements for high spatial resolution, this study employs a super-resolution discrete Fourier transform (DFT) codebook, resulting in a codebook size Nc that is significantly larger than the number of physical antennas Nv . Through its robust feature refinement capabilities, the ComHymba model maps microscopic signal fluctuations in the sub-6 GHz band into high-density decision fingerprints for the mmWave band, thereby circumventing the burdensome downlink beam sweeping process. 12                                                           

> (a) Top-1 beam selection accuracy versus SNR. (b) Top-3 beam selection accuracy versus SNR. Fig. 8. Comparison of beamforming decision accuracy across different SNR levels: (a) Top-1 and (b) Top-3. TABLE II QUANTITATIVE COMPARISON OF INFERENCE LATENCY (MS ): COM HYMBA VS . T RANSFORMER
> Model Scale Input Dim ComHymba Transformer Speedup
> Small (≈100M) (16, 32, 32) 7.02 9.17 1.31 ×
> (32, 32, 32) 13.11 19.93 1.52 ×
> (32, 32, 64) 25.24 46.97 1.86 ×
> (32, 64, 64) 47.32 154.61 3.27 ×
> Medium (≈200M) (16, 32, 32) 11.28 17.10 1.52 ×
> (32, 32, 32) 20.74 36.45 1.76 ×
> (32, 32, 64) 42.37 95.77 2.26 ×
> (32, 64, 64) 94.86 310.93 3.28 ×
> Large (≈400M) (16, 32, 32) 21.84 32.75 1.50 ×
> (32, 32, 32) 41.81 70.18 1.68 ×
> (32, 32, 64) 88.86 183.21 2.06 ×
> (32, 64, 64) 190.72 605.17 3.17 ×
> Huge (≈800M) (16, 32, 32) 42.35 68.50 1.62 ×
> (32, 32, 32) 85.23 140.10 1.64 ×
> (32, 32, 64) 175.21 360.51 2.06 ×
> (32, 64, 64) 394.14 1300.20 3.30 ×

Experimental results quantify and confirm the significant advantages of ComHymba in decision accuracy compared to existing state-of-the-art models. As shown in Fig. 8a, ComHymba demonstrates a clear lead in cross-band Top-1 prediction accuracy. At an SNR of 25 dB, its Top-1 accuracy reaches approximately 0.55, providing a substantial classifica-tion gain over LLM4CP and traditional MLP models. In the Top-3 accuracy evaluation, which offers a higher engineering reference value (as illustrated in Fig. 8b), the accuracy of ComHymba jumps to approximately 0.80 at 25 dB. This demonstrates that ComHymba, as a foundation model, can accurately extract frequency-independent underlying physical essences, ensuring the access reliability of high-frequency links while drastically reducing feedback overhead. 

3) Inference Latency and Scalability Analysis: Following the performance validation of downstream tasks, this section provides a quantitative analysis of the inference latency of the ComHymba architecture, emphasizing its scalability across varying model scales and input dimensions. The experimental evaluations are conducted on a high-performance computing platform utilizing an NVIDIA A40 (48GB VRAM) GPU. To evaluate the architectural robustness of our research frame-work, we tested model parameter scales ranging from 100M to 800M and four representative input tensor dimensions 

(L, K, N s) ranging from (16 , 32 , 32) to (32 , 64 , 64) .The experimental results, summarized in Table II, demon-strate that ComHymba exhibits a significant computational advantage over the traditional pure Transformer architecture, with the performance gap widening significantly as the sys-tem scale increases. While the pure Transformer architecture is constrained by the quadratic complexity of self-attention mechanisms, leading to a “computational wall” as input di-mensions grow, ComHymba utilizes a hybrid architecture with linear complexity to maintain efficient processing. As shown in Table II, this advantage is most prominent at the 800M parameter scale with the maximum (32 , 64 , 64) input dimen-sion, where the Transformer’s latency escalates to 1300 .20 ms, whereas ComHymba maintains a significantly lower latency of 394 .14 ms. Furthermore, the speedup factor relative to the Transformer improves from approximately 1.31 × at smaller configurations to over 3.30 × at the 800M scale, confirming that the architectural benefits of ComHymba are amplified as both the parameter and input sizes expand. This scalability is critical for the future development of large-scale AI-native foundation models, which must handle the massive high-dimensional CSI data generated by extremely large antenna arrays. By effectively decoupling processing time from the quadratic growth of spatial and temporal dimen-sions, ComHymba provides a robust and scalable intelligence backbone; even as communications move toward ultra-high-resolution sensing and complex spatial manifolds, the archi-tecture remains computationally viable. The ability to sustain low latency under increased parameter scales ensures that the model can capture deeper physical representations without sacrificing the throughput required for next-generation wireless systems. 13 

V. C ONCLUSION 

In this paper, we have presented ComHymba, a novel domain-aware wireless foundation model designed to address the multifaceted challenges of AI-native networks. By inte-grating the asymmetric masked autoencoder framework with the hybrid-head Hymba architecture, ComHymba success-fully bridges the gap between high-fidelity physical modeling and computational efficiency. The introduction of 3D spatio-temporal-frequency patchification, rotary positional embed-ding, and a decoupled amplitude-phase joint loss function ensures that the model captures the intrinsic electromagnetic properties of wireless channels while remaining robust to noise and data scarcity. Our comprehensive evaluation across eight critical down-stream tasks confirms that ComHymba consistently outper-forms specialized state-of-the-art baselines in both accuracy and generalization. Furthermore, the inference latency analysis highlights ComHymba’s exceptional scalability, achieving up to a 3.3 × speedup over traditional Transformer architectures at large scales. Ultimately, ComHymba serves as a unified and efficient intelligence backbone, providing a scalable and robust foundation for the realization of next-generation multi-functional communication and sensing systems. REFERENCES [1] W. Jiang, B. Han, M. A. Habibi, and H. D. Schotten, “The road towards 6G: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc. , vol. 2, pp. 334–366, Feb. 2021. [2] J. Guo, Y. Cui, S. Jin, and J. Zhang, “Large AI models for wireless physical layer,” IEEE Commun. Mag. , vol. 64, no. 5, pp. 148–155, 2026. [3] W. Chen, Y. Liu, H. Jafarkhani, Y. C. Eldar, P. Zhu, and K. B. Letaief, “Signal processing and learning for next generation multiple access in 6G,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process. , vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1146–1177, Oct. 2024. [4] M. Sheraz, T. C. Chuah, W. U. K. Tareen, A. Al-Habashna, S. I. Saeed, M. Ahmed et al., “A comprehensive survey on GenAI-enabled 6G: Technologies, challenges, and future research avenues,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc. , vol. 6, pp. 4563–4590, 2025. [5] F. Jiang, C. Pan, L. Dong, K. Wang, M. Debbah, D. Niyato, and Z. Han, “A comprehensive survey of large AI models for future communications: Foundations, applications, and challenges,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tuto-rials , vol. 28, pp. 4731–4764, 2026. [6] T. J. O’Shea and J. Hoydis, “An introduction to deep learning for the physical layer,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Networking , vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 563–575, Dec. 2017. [7] Q. Mao, F. Hu, and Q. Hao, “Deep learning for intelligent wireless networks: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials ,vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2595–2621, 2018. [8] G. Pan, Y. Gao, Y. Gao, W. Yu, Z. Zhong, X. Yang et al. , “AI-driven wireless positioning: Fundamentals, standards, state-of-the-art, and challenges,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials , vol. 28, pp. 4394–4428, 2026. [9] H. Sun, Y. Liu, A. Al-Tahmeesschi, A. Nag, M. Soleimanpour, B. Canberk, H. Arslan, and H. Ahmadi, “Advancing 6G: Survey for explainable AI on communications and network slicing,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc. , vol. 6, pp. 1372–1412, 2025. [10] F. Zhu et al. , “Wireless large AI model: shaping the AI-empowered future of 6G and beyond,” 2026, arXiv:2504.14653. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.14653. [11] Z. Chen, Z. Zhang, and Z. Yang, “Big AI models for 6G wireless networks: Opportunities, challenges, and research directions,” IEEE Wireless Commun. , vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 164–172, Oct. 2024. [12] L. Liang et al. , “Large language models for wireless communications: From adaptation to autonomy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.21524 , 2025. [13] W. Chen, B. Yang, J. Cheng, and B. Ai, “ST-LLM: Multi-scenario adaptation and multi-task learning wireless large language model,” Sci. China Inf. Sci. , 2026. [14] J. Jiang, Y. Gao, X. Wu, and S. Xu, “Towards channel foundation models (CFMs): Motivations, methodologies and opportunities,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.13637 , 2025. [15] B. Liu, S. Gao, X. Liu, X. Cheng, and L. Yang, “WiFo: Wireless foundation model for channel prediction,” Sci. China Inf. Sci. , vol. 68, no. 6, p. 162302, 2025. [16] T. Yang, P. Zhang, M. Zheng, Y. Shi, L. Jing, J. Huang, and N. Li, “WirelessGPT: A generative pre-trained multi-task learning framework for wireless communication,” IEEE Network , vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 58–65, 2025. [17] L. Yu, L. Shi, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, and G. Liu, “ChannelGPT: A large model toward real-world channel foundation model for 6G en-vironment intelligence communication,” IEEE Commun. Mag. , vol. 63, no. 10, pp. 68–74, Oct. 2025. [18] J. Guo, P. Jiang, C.-K. Wen, S. Jin, and J. Zhang, “LVM4CSI: Enabling direct application of pre-trained large vision models for wireless channel tasks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.05121 , 2025. [19] S. Alikhani, G. Charan, and A. Alkhateeb, “LWM: A pre-trained wireless foundation model for universal feature extraction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. Commun. Netw. , 2025, pp. 1–6. [20] Y. Tay, M. Dehghani, D. Bahri, and D. Metzler, “Efficient Transformers: A Survey,” ACM Comput. Surv. , vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1–28, 2022. [21] K. He, X. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Li, P. Doll´ ar, and R. Girshick, “Masked autoencoders are scalable vision learners,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. , 2022, pp. 15979–15988. [22] X. Dong et al. , “Hymba: A hybrid-head architecture for small language models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. , 2025, pp. 1–23. [23] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. , 2017, pp. 5998–6008. [24] T. Dao and A. Gu, “Transformers are SSMs: Generalized models and efficient algorithms through structured state space duality,” Proc. Mach. Learn. Res. , vol. 235, pp. 10041–10071, 2024. [25] Study on channel model for frequencies from 0.5 to 100 GHz (Release 16) , 3GPP Technical report (TR) 38.901, Dec. 2019, v16.1.0. [26] S. Jaeckel, L. Raschkowski, K. B¨ orner, and L. Thiele, “QuaDRiGa: A 3-D multi-cell channel model with time evolution for enabling virtual field trials,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. , vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 3242—3256, Jun. 2014. [27] M. Alrabeiah and A. Alkhateeb, “Deep learning for mmWave beam and blockage prediction using sub-6 GHz channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun. ,vol. 68, no. 9, pp. 5504–5518, Sep. 2020. [28] X. Wang, L. Gao, S. Mao, and S. Pandey, “CSI-based fingerprinting for indoor localization: A deep learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. , vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 763–776, Jan. 2017. [29] M. S. Safari, V. Pourahmadi, and S. Sodagari, “Deep UL2DL: Data-driven channel knowledge transfer from uplink to downlink,” IEEE Open J. Veh. Technol. , vol. 1, pp. 29–44, 2020. [30] R. Wan, Y. Chen, S. Song, and Z. Wang, “CSI-based MIMO indoor positioning using attention-aided deep learning,” IEEE Commun. Lett. ,vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 53–57, Jan. 2024. [31] W. Jiang and H. D. Schotten, “Deep learning for fading channel predic-tion,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc. , vol. 1, pp. 320–332, Mar. 2020. [32] J. Chung, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Empirical evaluation of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.3555 , 2014. [33] A. Salihu, S. Schwarz, and M. Rupp, “Attention aided CSI wireless localization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Signal Process. Adv. Wireless Commun. , 2022, pp. 1–5. [34] H. Jiang, M. Cui, D. W. K. Ng, and L. Dai, “Accurate channel prediction based on transformer: Making mobility negligible,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. , vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 2717–2732, Sep. 2022. [35] B. Liu, X. Liu, S. Gao, X. Cheng, and L. Yang, “LLM4CP: Adapting large language models for channel prediction,” J. Commun. Inf. Net-works , vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 113–125, Jun. 2024. [36] X. Liu, S. Gao, B. Liu, X. Cheng, and L. Yang, “LLM4WM: Adapting LLM for wireless multi-tasking,” IEEE Trans. Mach. Learn. Commun. Networking , vol. 3, pp. 835–847, 2025. [37] M. C. Botero, E. A. Beyazit, N. Slamnik-Krijestorac, and J. M. Marquez-Barja, “HELENA: High-efficiency learning-based channel estimation using dual neural attention,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13408 , 2025. [38] A. Ali, N. Gonz´ alez-Prelcic, and R. W. Heath, Jr., “Millimeter wave beam-selection using out-of-band spatial information,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 1038–1052, Feb. 2018.