Title: Differentiable Conditional Mutual Information for Multi-Terminal Linear Gaussian Wireless Networks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.22301v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 01:56:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# Differentiable Conditional Mutual Information for Multi-Terminal Linear Gaussian Wireless Networks 

Tadashi Wadayama and Siqi Na 

Department of Computer Science, Nagoya Institute of Technology, Nagoya 466-8555, Japan Email: wadayama@nitech.ac.jp 

Abstract —The rate regions of multi-terminal Gaussian channels (multiple-access, broadcast, interference, relay) are delimited by conditional mutual informations I(VA; VB | VC ) among groups of input and output nodes; bringing such channels under differentiable physical-layer design therefore hinges on evaluating any such conditional MI, and its gradient, on a unified computation graph. Modeling the network as a linear Gaussian directed acyclic graph (Gaussian-DAG), we obtain I(VA; VB | VC ) in closed form: from the node-pair covariances produced by one K-recursion forward pass, it is a log-determinant difference of two sub-block Schur complements of the support covariance. The construction is built entirely from automatic-differentiation (AD) primitives, so any differentiable function of finitely many conditional MIs is end-to-end differentiable in the design parameters; this broad class includes linear objectives (weighted sum-rate, secrecy), the rate functions of standard multi-terminal rate regions, and non-linear composites of these. A single reverse-mode AD sweep yields the Wirtinger gradient with respect to all controllable factors at once, so any such objective can be handled by projected gradient iterations without problem-specific gradient derivation. We demonstrate the framework on three experiments: rate-region maximization for a two-user MIMO multiple-access channel, secure precoding on a MIMO wiretap channel (extended to a Lagrangian sweep that traces the empirical leakage-rate Pareto curve, with the classical secrecy rate as the λ = 1 point), and the same rate-region objective applied to a larger multi-hop multiple-access network. 

Keywords —Conditional mutual information, linear Gaussian DAG, K-recursion, Schur complement, multi-terminal rate region, differentiable programming, automatic differentiation, projected gradient method. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Mutual information (MI) has long served as a central design objective for vector Gaussian communication channels: from Telatar’s waterfilling solution for the single-link MIMO capacity [ 3] to the Palomar–Verd ´u closed-form gradient of MI with respect to the transmit precoder [ 4], which underpins a wide class of MIMO precoding, beamforming, and sensing designs. A common feature of these classical results is that each new topology (a multi-hop amplify-and-forward relay, a diamond network, a precoded broadcast, a cell-free MIMO front-end) demands its own analytical derivation of ∇F I, with no topology-agnostic mechanism for these gradient computations. This is increasingly at odds with how modern wireless systems are designed: the physical layer is a composition of cascaded linear-Gaussian stages whose parameters one would like to tune jointly, end to end, by gradient descent in a single computation graph, a differentiable-programming workflow analogous to that used in deep learning. A natural way to bring MI-based design under this umbrella is the linear Gaussian directed acyclic graph (Gaussian-DAG) framework of [ 10 ]: every node is a circular complex Gaussian vector and every edge a linear transformation, and the node-pair covariances Kjk = E[Vj V H 

> k

] are computed by a topological-order recursion (the K-recursion ) using only matrix products, sums, and Hermitian transposes, the standard primitives of complex automatic-differentiation (AD) engines. The local-to-global covariance map underlying the K-recursion is itself classical [ 16 ], [ 17 ], [ 18 ]; [ 10 ] contributes its formulation as a single differentiable forward operator on which AD-based optimization can be built. In that framework, the end-to-end log-determinant MI between a single input node and a single output node is a differentiable scalar functional of the controllable factors, and reverse-mode AD delivers exact Wirtinger gradients for arbitrary topologies in a single backward pass. Multi-terminal design objectives, however, are not of this sin-gle, unconditional form: the two-user MAC pentagon is bounded by the conditional MIs I(VX1 ; VY | VX2 ), I(VX2 ; VY | VX1 ),and I(VX1 , V X2 ; VY ); a secrecy rate is the MI difference 

I(VX ; VY )−I(VX ; VZ ); broadcast, interference, and relay rate functions are signed combinations of such conditional MIs. Bringing multi-terminal design under differentiable program-ming therefore hinges on evaluating any conditional mutual information I(VA; VB | VC ) on the DAG through one common, differentiable computation graph. For context, three alternative routes to differentiable MI-based design merit brief comment. Variational and contrastive estimators (MINE [ 12 ], InfoNCE [ 13 ]) approximate MI through a learned lower bound; their gradients are stochastic, sample-based quantities tied to that bound. A score-function-based DAG framework [ 11 ] avoids that variational gap, in return for fitting a denoising score network and integrating via Monte-Carlo. In the linear-Gaussian setting these costs are eliminated: covariances propagate analytically along the DAG via the K-recursion of [ 10 ], and MI gradients on the design parameters are recovered by a single reverse-mode pass with neither training nor sampling. 

Contribution: This paper extends the differentiable Gaussian-DAG approach from a single MI to arbitrary condi-tional mutual information, through a three-step computational chain. (i) From the K-blocks produced by one K-recursion for-ward pass, the conditional mutual information I(VA; VB | VC )

of any disjoint node subsets A, B, C is obtained in closed form, as a log-determinant difference of sub-block Schur complements of the support covariance (Proposition 1), a procedure built entirely from AD-compatible primitives. (ii) A conditional-

> arXiv:2606.22301v1 [cs.IT] 21 Jun 2026

MI objective is any function of finitely many conditional mutual informations on the DAG that is differentiable in those arguments; by the chain rule, every such objective is end-to-end differentiable in the design parameters. Familiar instances include weighted sum-rate, fairness, and secrecy objectives, as well as the rate functions of multi-terminal rate regions (the multiple-access pentagon, the Gaussian broadcast region with dirty-paper coding, the Han–Kobayashi inner bound, and decode-/compress-and-forward relay bounds, once their coding order, auxiliary-variable structure, and time-sharing choice are fixed). Non-linear composites, such as the composite sigmoid surrogate of rate-region outage, also fall within the class. (iii) Asingle reverse-mode AD sweep through the shared graph yields the Wirtinger gradient with respect to all controllable factors at once, so any such objective is amenable to projected-gradient optimization with no problem-specific derivation. The stochastic optimization of the outage surrogate under fading is left to a companion paper. 

Paper Organization: Section II reviews the linear Gaussian DAG model and the K-recursion of [ 10 ]. Section III estab-lishes the closed-form, differentiable evaluator of arbitrary conditional mutual information (Proposition 1) and its reverse-mode Wirtinger gradient. Section IV introduces conditional-MI objectives (from linear combinations to multi-terminal rate-region functions) and their optimization by the projected gradient method. Section V reports numerical results, and Section VI concludes. II. PRELIMINARIES 

This section reviews the linear Gaussian DAG model and the K-recursion of [ 10 ], fixing notation and the K-block primitives used throughout the paper. 

A. Notation 

Uppercase italic letters (e.g., X, V j ) denote random variables or random vectors, while boldface letters (e.g., A, Σ) denote deterministic vectors and matrices. AH denotes the Hermitian (conjugate) transpose; A∗ denotes the entry-wise complex conjugate; Σ ≻ 0 means Hermitian positive definite (HPD); 

Σ ⪰ 0 means Hermitian positive semidefinite (PSD); Id is the 

d×d identity matrix; tr( ·), det( ·), ∥ · ∥ F are trace, determinant, and Frobenius norm; E[·] and Pr[ ·] denote expectation and probability; Y ∼ CN (μ, Σ) denotes a circular complex Gaussian random vector with mean μ and covariance Σ; and 

στ (x) ≜ (1 + e−x/τ )−1 is the sigmoid with temperature τ > 0.

B. Linear Gaussian DAG Model and K-Recursion 

Let G = ( V, E) be a topologically ordered DAG with node index set V = {1, . . . , M }. We adopt the convention that the first 

K nodes are the user-input roots, R = {1, . . . , K } ⊊ V, with 

K < M and one root per rate-bearing user, so that node k ∈ R 

carries the input signal of the rate-Rk user, and the rate-index set [K] = {1, . . . , K } coincides with the root index set R. Each node j ∈ V carries a complex random vector Vj ∈ Cdj . The roots 

{Vr }r∈R are jointly circular complex Gaussian with prescribed block covariance ΣR ≜ [Σr,r ′ ]r,r ′∈R ⪰ 0: the diagonal blocks 

Σr,r = Σr are the input covariances of the rate-Rr users, and the off-diagonal blocks Σr,r ′ (r̸ = r′) encode any prescribed inter-source correlation. The independent-input case Σr,r ′ = 0

(r̸ = r′) is adopted in Sections IV and V; correlated roots are admissible for distributed source coding problems such as Slepian–Wolf and CEO. For each non-root node j ∈ V \R , let 

Pa( j) ⊆ V denote the set of in-neighbors of j in G (its parent nodes); the node obeys the structural equation 

Vj = X

> i∈Pa( j)

Aji Vi + Zj , Zj ∼ CN (0, Σj ), (1) with edge matrices Aji ∈ Cdj ×di and additive channel noise 

Zj . The noises {Zj }j∈V\R are mutually independent and independent of the user inputs {Vr }r∈R .

1) Edge factorization and design parameter: Each edge matrix admits a multiplicative decomposition 

Aji = A(1)  

> ji

A(2)  

> ji

· · · A(Lji ) 

> ji

(2) into Lji ≥ 1 matrix factors, each labeled either controllable (a tunable design variable: a precoder, relay matrix, beamformer, etc.) or constant (a fixed physical quantity such as a channel realization H). Indexing the controllable factors by a designated set D ⊆ { (j, i, ℓ )} yields the design parameter 

η ≜ {A(ℓ) 

> ji

: ( j, i, ℓ ) ∈ D} , (3) to be optimized over a feasible set F that collects the power and structural constraints of the design: per-user Frobenius power balls ∥Fk∥2 

> F

≤ Pk, total-power balls, per-antenna power, unitary precoders, or hybrid analog/digital structures. Both the K-recursion below and the conditional-MI evaluation of Section III-A treat the constant factors as fixed and expose 

η as the optimization variable on which Wirtinger gradients are taken in Section III-B. 

2) Shared controllable factors: It is common for a single tunable matrix to enter many edges at once: a relay node i’s processing matrix Fi, for instance, is applied to its received signal and then propagated outward, so every outgoing edge 

(j, i ) with i ∈ Pa( j) carries the factorization Aji = Hji Fi with 

Hji the fixed channel realization. The design parameter η

therefore aliases Fi across multiple index positions, and the AD computation graph realizes those positions as fan-out edges from a single leaf node for Fi. The backward pass aggregates the gradient contributions arriving along all of these fan-out edges into one ∇F ∗ 

> i

U via the chain rule, at the same asymptotic cost as the forward K-recursion [ 14 ]. Section V-C exploits this mechanism to jointly tune the nine relay processing matrices of a multi-hop MAC under a single shared power budget. 

3) The K-recursion: The local-to-global covariance map of a linear Gaussian DAG, from the local edge matrices and noise covariances to the joint node-pair covariances, is classical [ 16 ], [ 17 ], [ 18 ] and equivalent to the standard closed form (I −

A)−1Σ(I−A)−H; [ 10 ] cast it as a single differentiable forward operator, the K-recursion , which constructs every node-pair covariance Kjk ≜ E[Vj V H 

> k

] in topological order: for j, k ∈ V 

with j ≥ k,

Kjk =



Σj,k , j, k ∈ R ,

P

> i∈Pa( j)

Aji Kik , j / ∈ R , k < j, 

P

> i,i ′∈Pa( j)

Aji Kii ′ AH 

> ji ′

+Σj , j / ∈ R , k = j, 

(4) with the Hermitian-flip convention Kab = KH 

> ba

for a < b . The first case reads the diagonal and inter-source blocks of ΣRabove directly as the base case. In particular, the cross-block 

Kik in the second line of (4) is read using the Hermitian-flip convention whenever i < k , and likewise Kii ′ in the third line whenever i < i ′. Each step uses only matrix products, sums, and Hermitian transposes, so the full collection {Kjk }j≥k is obtained in a single forward pass and is a smooth function of the design parameter η. This inverse-free, single-pass, all-pairs form is what makes the K-recursion directly composable with reverse-mode AD; the conditional-MI evaluator of Section III inherits that composability. 

Remark 1 (Justification of (4) ). The base case Kr,r ′ = Σr,r ′

is the definition of the joint root covariance ΣR and requires no independence among the roots. For a non-root j and k < j ,substituting (1) into the defining expectation of Kjk and using that Zj is independent of every Vk with k < j collapses the cross terms and leaves the cross-block formula. The self-block case k = j arises from substituting (1) on both factors, which expands into a double sum over Pa( j)×Pa( j) plus the noise auto-covariance Σj . Topological ordering guarantees that every right-hand side in (4) refers to index pairs strictly preceding 

(j, k ), so one forward sweep through V computes the entire upper-triangular collection. See [10] for the full argument. Tracking every cross-block, not merely the diagonal 

{Kjj }j , is essential: whenever a node j has two or more parents i̸ = i′ ∈ Pa( j), the self-block Kjj in (4) contains terms Aji Kii ′ AH 

> ji ′

involving the cross-block Kii ′ between two distinct upstream nodes, which in turn requires cross-blocks further upstream. This dependence on parent cross-covariances is unavoidable in any DAG with merging nodes. 

Remark 2 (Computational cost) . Let dmax ≜ max j dj . For a sparse DAG with |Pa( j)| = O(1) , the recursion (4) pro-duces the O(M 2) blocks {Kjk }j≥k in O(M 2d3max ) arithmetic operations and O(M 2d2max ) memory. This is a worst-case uniform-dimension estimate; variable node dimensions yield the corresponding blockwise sum. For the experiments of Section V (M ≤ 12 , d = 4 ), the resulting cost is negligible in PyTorch double precision. The reverse-mode AD backward pass runs in the same asymptotic time; the only added cost is keeping the forward activations in memory for the backward pass. III. DIFFERENTIABLE CONDITIONAL MUTUAL 

INFORMATION 

This section is the analytic core of the paper. We use the K-blocks of Section II-B to obtain I(VA; VB | VC ) in closed form (Proposition 1) and show that, via the Wirtinger calculus, it is end-to-end differentiable in the design parameter η with gradients delivered by a single reverse-mode AD pass. 

A. Log-Det Conditional MI via Block Extraction 

We now use the K-blocks of Section II-B to evaluate arbitrary conditional mutual information on G. Let A, B, C 

be disjoint subsets of V whose conditional mutual information we wish to evaluate. Choose an arbitrary but fixed ordering of their union and set 

S ≜ A∪B ∪C = {s1, . . . , s n} (5) (the support of the computation), and for any subset X ⊆ V enu-merate its elements as {x1, . . . , x |X|} in a fixed order and define the stacked vector VX ≜ [V ⊤ 

> x1

· · · V ⊤ 

> x|X|

]⊤. All conditional MI values below are invariant under such orderings (each amounts to a simultaneous row/column permutation of ΣS,S ). We adopt two subscript conventions throughout: (i) juxtaposition of set symbols denotes set union, XY ≜ X ∪ Y ; (ii) a comma in a covariance subscript separates the row index set from the column index set, ΣX,Y ≜ E[VX V H 

> Y

] = [ Kxiyj ]xi∈X, y j ∈Y .Thus BC below denotes the union B ∪ C, not a Cartesian or matrix product, and ΣA,BC is the cross-covariance block between VA and VB∪C .In particular, the support stacked vector VS has the block covariance 

ΣS,S ≜



Ks1s1 · · · Ks1sn

... . . . ...

Ksns1 · · · Ksnsn

 = [ Ksisj ]1≤i,j ≤n, (6) formed by stacking only the n2 K-blocks indexed by S, using the Hermitian-flip convention of (4) (Kab = KH 

> ba

for a < b ) for any sub-diagonal entry Ksisj with si < s j . We refer to this assembly as block extraction ; every row/column sub-block 

ΣA,A , ΣA,C , ΣC,C , ΣA,BC , ΣBC,BC , . . . 

entering the Schur complements below is read off from (6) by selecting the corresponding row and column index ranges. Recall that for a positive-definite, block-partitioned Hermi-tian matrix M =  P NN H Q

 with Q ≻ 0, the Schur complement 

of Q in M is P −N Q −1N H; when M is the covariance of a jointly Gaussian pair (VP , V Q), this Schur complement is precisely the conditional covariance of VP given VQ [ 1, Ch. 8]. We call these sub-block Schur complements of ΣS,S because they are formed from selected row and column blocks of the support covariance. The following proposition turns the K-blocks produced by (4) into a closed-form, log-determinant expression for 

I(VA; VB | VC ) on any disjoint node subsets A, B, C of G.The analytic statement is made in the positive-definite regime 

ΣS,S ≻ 0; a simple sufficient condition is that the joint root covariance ΣR and every non-root noise covariance Σj are positive definite, as in the common full-rank input/noise setting of wireless channels. Rank-deficient cases (which may arise, for instance, when ΣR is itself rank-deficient) lie outside the exact log-determinant statement below, and near-singular instances are treated in numerical implementations by adding a small positive multiple of the identity to the conditioning matrix before Cholesky factorization (see Remark 3). 

Proposition 1 (Closed-form conditional MI on the K-recursion) .

Let G be a linear Gaussian DAG with K-blocks {Kjk } produced by (4) , fix disjoint subsets A, B, C ⊆ V with A, B non-empty (the conditioning set C may be empty), set S = A∪B ∪C and the block covariance ΣS,S of (6) , and adopt the convention 

ΣA|∅ ≜ ΣA,A . Suppose the support covariance is positive definite, ΣS,S ≻ 0. Then: 

(a) For C̸ = ∅, the conditional covariances of VA given VC

and given VBC are sub-block Schur complements of ΣS,S ,

ΣA|C = ΣA,A −ΣA,C Σ−1 

> C,C

ΣC,A ,

ΣA|BC = ΣA,A −ΣA,BC Σ−1 

> BC,BC

ΣBC,A ; (7) for C = ∅, the first identity reduces to the convention 

ΣA|∅ ≜ ΣA,A stated above, and the second holds with 

BC = B (which is nonempty since B is nonempty). 

(b) The conditional mutual information of (VA, V B ) given VC

admits the log-determinant closed form 

I(VA; VB | VC ) = log det ΣA|C −log det ΣA|BC ; (8) 

the unconditional case C = ∅ specializes to I(VA; VB ) = log det ΣA,A −log det ΣA|B .Proof: (a) The linear Gaussian DAG model of Section II-B makes every Vj an affine function of the jointly Gaussian roots 

{Vr }r∈R and of the mutually independent Gaussian noises 

{Zj }, so VS is circular complex Gaussian with covariance 

ΣS,S ≻ 0. Every nonempty principal sub-block of ΣS,S is therefore positive definite, and the same holds for every Schur complement obtained from it. For nonempty disjoint A, X ⊆ S,the joint vector (VA, V X ) has covariance ΣAX,AX ≻ 0, and the Schur-complement / conditional-covariance correspondence recalled above gives ΣA|X = ΣA,A −ΣA,X Σ−1 

> X,X

ΣX,A ≻ 0 as the conditional covariance of the (circular complex Gaussian) 

VA | VX . Specializing to X = C (when C̸ = ∅) and X = BC 

yields the two formulas in (7) ; the boundary case C = ∅ is covered by the convention ΣA|∅ ≜ ΣA,A ≻ 0.

(b) Since ΣS,S ≻ 0, the conditional covariances obtained in part (a) are positive definite, so the circular-complex-Gaussian differential entropy formula applies to both. By the entropy chain rule, I(VA; VB | VC ) = h(VA | VC )−h(VA | VBC ), where 

h(VA | V∅) ≜ h(VA) for C = ∅. A circular complex Gaussian vector with covariance Σ ≻ 0 has differential entropy h(·) = log det( πe Σ) in nats; substituting the conditional covariances of (a) and noting that the log det( πe I) terms cancel yields (8) .The expression (8) is asymmetric only in its computational form: exchanging A and B throughout yields the equivalent formula I(VA; VB | VC ) = log det ΣB|C −log det ΣB|AC based on the conditional covariance of VB , with the same value by the A ↔ B symmetry of conditional MI. Figure 1 visualizes the two sub-block Schur complements of (7) as selections from the 3 × 3 block partition of ΣS,S 

by the disjoint subsets A, B, C . In each panel the anchor cell 

ΣA,A is shaded green, the blocks entering the correction term are shaded blue, and the uninvolved blocks are greyed out. Panel (a) shows ΣA|C , which uses only the A- and C-blocks; panel (b) shows ΣA|BC , which uses every block of ΣS,S .

Remark 3 (Numerical implementation) . The exact formulas of Proposition 1 are stated under positive definiteness; in finite-precision arithmetic, we evaluate a slightly regularized version by adding a small diagonal jitter at two distinct points: (i) 

before the Cholesky factorization of the conditioning matrices 

ΣC,C , ΣBC,BC in the Schur-complement solves of (7) ; and (ii) 

before the Cholesky factorization of the resulting conditional covariances ΣA|C , ΣA|BC for the log-determinants of (8) . The inverses Σ−1 

> C,C

and Σ−1 

> BC,BC

in (7) appear for notational clarity; they are never formed explicitly in practice. Each sub-block Schur complement is evaluated through a Cholesky-based linear solve, and each log-determinant in (8) through the sum of the diagonal logs of the corresponding Cholesky factor: a real scalar, since the diagonal of the Cholesky factor of a ΣA,A ΣA,B ΣA,C                            

> ΣB,A ΣB,B ΣB,C
> ΣC,A ΣC,B ΣC,C
> A
> B
> C
> ABC
> (a) ΣA|C
> =ΣA,A −ΣA,C Σ−1
> C,C ΣC,A
> ΣA,A ΣA,BC
> ΣBC,A Σ−1
> BC,BC
> A
> BC
> ABC
> (b) ΣA|BC
> =ΣA,A −ΣA,BC Σ−1
> BC,BC ΣBC,A
> Fig. 1. Sub-block Schur complements formed from the support covariance
> ΣS,S : (a) ΣA|C; (b) ΣA|BC .

Hermitian positive-definite matrix is positive real, and any small imaginary residual produced by complex-tensor floating-point arithmetic is discarded by construction. At point (i), when fading realizations or rank-deficient controllable factors drive the conditioning matrix close to singular, the diagonal jitter stabilizes the solve. At point (ii), accumulated floating-point error along the K-recursion / block-extraction / Schur pipeline may also cause the output covariances ΣA|C , ΣA|BC to drift away from Hermitian positive-definite form; we therefore symmetrize each as 12 (Σ+ΣH) and apply a matching diagonal jitter before its log-determinant is evaluated. On the positive-definite domain of Proposition 1, evalu-ating any I(VA; VB | VC ) on G thus reduces to three smooth ingredients applied to the K-blocks indexed by the support S

of (5) : (i) block extraction (6) of ΣS,S , (ii) two sub-block Schur complements (7) , and (iii) two log-determinants in (8) . With a fixed diagonal regularization Σ 7 → Σ+ϵI, the same pipeline evaluates a smooth regularized surrogate on the entire feasible set F. A conditional-differential-entropy specialization of the same pipeline (one Schur complement and one log-determinant) is recorded in Appendix B. 

B. Wirtinger Calculus and Reverse-Mode AD 

For a real-valued function f (Θ) ∈ R of a complex matrix variable Θ ∈ Cp×q , the Wirtinger conjugate-side derivative 

∇Θ∗ f ≜ (∂f /∂ Θ∗)T is the steepest-ascent direction in the standard real-Euclidean metric [ 15 ], [ 4 ] and satisfies ∂f /∂ Θ =(∂f /∂ Θ∗)∗, so that one of the two partials suffices to specify 

∇f . When f depends on a tuple of complex matrix variables, such as the design parameter η of (3) , we write ∇η∗ f for the tuple of conjugate-side derivatives, one per controllable factor. Modern automatic-differentiation engines that support complex tensors (PyTorch [ 6 ] in particular) compose this Wirtinger calculus through every elementary complex primitive (matrix products, sums, Hermitian transposes, Cholesky factorizations, triangular solves, and Cholesky-based log-determinants); a single reverse-mode pass therefore returns ∇Θ∗ f at every complex leaf up to the convention of the AD engine and finite-precision arithmetic, with no manual derivation. 1 Because each step of the K-recursion (4) and each ingredient of the block-extraction pipeline (6) – (8) is built from such primitives, any conditional MI on G that satisfies the positive-definiteness condition of Proposition 1 is an end-to-end differentiable function of the design parameter η of (3) , and its Wirtinger gradient ∇η∗I is delivered by a single reverse-mode AD sweep. IV. CONDITIONAL -MI O BJECTIVES AND THEIR 

GRADIENT -B ASED OPTIMIZATION 

Section III evaluates a single conditional mutual information 

I(VA; VB | VC ) as an end-to-end differentiable function of the design parameter η. A physical-layer design problem is seldom a single such quantity; this section shows that any differentiable function of conditional mutual informations, used as either an objective or a constraint, inherits the same shared differentiable computation graph (Section IV-C ) and is therefore optimized by the projected gradient method. The constant edge factors (the channel realization) are fixed throughout this section, so every quantity is written as a function of η alone. 

A. Conditional-MI Objectives 

A physical-layer design objective aggregates conditional mutual informations into a scalar. The most general form is 

U (η) = Φ  I1(η), . . . , I N (η), In(η) ≜ I(VAn ; VBn | VCn ),

(9) with disjoint An, B n, C n ⊆ V and a differentiable composition 

Φ : RN → R that may further depend on auxiliary constants (target rates, a temperature, etc.); we call such a U a conditional-MI objective . Φ need only be differentiable on an open set containing the attainable CMI vector, so logarithmic utilities such as proportional fairness log In are handled in their standard regularized form log( In + δ) in degenerate zero-rate cases. By Proposition 1 each In is a smooth function of η on the one shared K-recursion graph of Section III-A , the chain rule makes U differentiable in η, and a single reverse-mode AD sweep (Section III-B ) returns the Wirtinger gradient ∇η∗ U

with respect to all controllable factors at once, independent of the number N of CMIs requested or of the choice of Φ.The canonical instance is the linear form 

U (η) = 

> N

X

> n=1

αn I(VAn ; VBn | VCn ), (10) with real weights {αn} encoding a weighted sum-rate criterion (positive weights), a secrecy or leakage penalty (sign-indefinite weights), or a Lagrangian relaxation of a conditional-MI constraint (Section IV-B ); we call such a U a linear conditional-MI objective . This form covers many standard Gaussian multi-terminal rate functions: after fixing the coding order, auxiliary-variable structure, time-sharing choice, and Gaussian linear parametrization, the rate-function facets of the multiple-access, broadcast, interference, and relay rate regions [ 1 ], [ 2 ] can be written as finite linear combinations of conditional MIs with       

> 1Specific complex-AD conventions are engine- and version-dependent. In the PyTorch convention used in our implementation, a complex leaf’s .grad
> attribute is populated with 2∂f /∂ Θ∗rather than ∂f /∂ Θ∗itself; this fixed multiplicative offset is absorbed into the step size of any first-order optimizer and does not affect optimization behavior. Readers using a different engine or version should consult its current documentation.

weights {αn} of either sign, so the framework provides a direct, differentiable handle on the rate-function calculus of multi-terminal information theory; explicit examples, including the non-linear composite sigmoid surrogate of rate-region outage and a worked two-user MAC instance, are collected in Appendix A. 

B. Conditional-MI Constraints 

Conditional MIs are equally first-class on the constraint 

side of a design problem. Combined with a conditional-MI objective (9) , Nc such inequalities form the constrained problem 

max  

> η∈F

U (η) s.t. gn(η) ≤ Rn, n = 1 , . . . , N c, (11) where each gn is a conditional MI on G, or more generally a linear combination of conditional MIs forming an aggregate rate budget, and Rn a prescribed bound. Standard single-MI instances are leakage budgets in physical-layer security (I(VX ; VZ ) ≤ ε), per-link fronthaul caps in cell-free networks (I(VXk ; V ˆXk ) ≤ CFH for each k), and information-bottleneck constraints ( I(VU ; VX ) ≤ RIB ); aggregate forms such as a total fronthaul cap P 

> k

I(VXk ; V ˆXk ) ≤ Ctotal fit the same template. For any multipliers λ = ( λ1, . . . , λ Nc ) with λn ≥ 0, the Lagrangian of (11) reduces, up to a constant P 

> n

λnRn that is independent of η and immaterial for the inner η-optimization, to the η-dependent part 

Uλ(η) = U (η)−

> Nc

X

> n=1

λn gn(η), (12) which is itself a sign-indefinite conditional-MI objective (9) (and linear, (10) , when U is): every gn is evaluated from the K-blocks of Proposition 1 on the same shared graph, and one reverse-mode AD sweep returns the Lagrangian gradient ∇η∗ Uλ needed for the primal update. Conditional-MI constraints therefore introduce no new computational primitive. 

C. Shared Differentiable Computation Graph 

The objectives (9) , the constraint MIs of (11) , and their non-linear composites (Appendix A) are all built from one primitive: a conditional MI I(VA; VB | VC ) on the linear Gaussian DAG 

G, evaluated from the K-blocks of Proposition 1. The whole design problem thus sits on a single shared computation graph 

rooted at η, on which each gradient evaluation is the pipeline: (1) one K-recursion forward pass (4) computing the K-blocks from η;(2) block extractions, Schur complements, and log-determinants for every CMI requested by the scalar objective U (or Lagrangian Uλ); (3) formation of the scalar U or Uλ;(4) one reverse-mode AD backward sweep from that scalar, returning ∇η∗ U (or ∇η∗ Uλ) with respect to all controllable factors (Section III-B). Steps (1) and (4) each run once per evaluation, independent of the number N of CMIs requested or of the choice of Φ; the per-CMI cost lies in step (2). The resulting gradient feeds the projected gradient update of Section IV-D. D. Optimization of Conditional-MI Objectives 

The framework targets optimization problems of the form 

max  

> η∈F

U (η) s.t. gn(η) ≤ Rn, n = 1 , . . . , N c, (13) combining (i) a conditional-MI objective U of (9) in the design parameter η of (3) , (ii) the physical feasible set F

of Section II-B , which encodes Frobenius or total-power budgets, diagonal or unit-modulus parameterizations, and similar structural constraints on the controllable factors, and (iii) Nc ≥ 0 conditional-MI constraints (11) when present. The constraint term in (13) is absent for Nc = 0 , and each gn on the constraint side may be a single CMI (e.g., a leakage budget) or a linear combination of CMIs (e.g., an aggregate fronthaul cap); see Section IV-B . The two constraint types are handled differently by the two steps described below: F is enforced by Euclidean projection in every iterate (Section IV-D 1), while the conditional-MI constraints are absorbed into the objective via Lagrangian relaxation (Section IV-D2). 

1) Projected Gradient Method: We first treat the case Nc =0, where (13) reduces to maximization of a conditional-MI objective over F. The objective U of (9) is maximized when it scores a communication benefit (e.g., a weighted sum-rate) and minimized when it scores a cost (e.g., a rate-region outage surrogate). Either direction is handled by the projected gradient method: with step size αt > 0,

η(t+1) = Π F

 η(t) ±αt ∇η∗ U (η(t)), (14) the + sign giving gradient ascent for maximization and the 

− sign descent for minimization, where ΠF is the Euclidean projection onto F, in closed form for the constraint families of Section II-B . Each iteration is one K-recursion forward pass, one reverse-mode AD backward pass, and one closed-form projection; the gradient is exact up to the Wirtinger convention of Section III-B . Since U is in general nonconvex in 

η and F may itself be nonconvex (e.g., unit-modulus or hybrid analog/digital structures), the method should be understood as seeking a stationary point: under standard smoothness and step-size assumptions, any limit point of the iterates satisfying the projected first-order condition is stationary. 

2) Constrained Objectives via Lagrangian Relaxation: 

When Nc ≥ 1 conditional-MI constraints are present in (13) ,the Lagrangian (12) of Section IV-B is itself a sign-indefinite conditional-MI objective (a sign-indefinite linear instance (10) when U is linear), so for any fixed multiplier vector λ ≥ 0 the projected-gradient update (14) applies to Uλ unchanged (the structural feasible set F is enforced as before). To trace the empirical Pareto curve between U and the constraint quantities 

gn, λ is swept on a grid; at each λ several initial points (a warm start from the previous λ together with random complex-Gaussian restarts) are optimized in parallel and the candidate of highest Uλ is retained, mitigating the local optima of the non-convex Lagrangian. Under the same standard smoothness and step-size assumptions, any limit point is a local KKT point of (11) rather than a global optimum, so sweeping 

λ traces locally supported Pareto-stationary points; for any active constraint ( λn > 0), complementary slackness ties the multiplier to the constraint level via Rn = gn(η∗

> λ

). The wiretap experiment of Section V-B implements this procedure for a single constraint.                              

> TABLE I. NUMERICAL PARAMETERS OF THE THREE EXPERIMENTS .
> Section V-A Section V-B Section V-C Antenna dim d444Power budget P8836 Iterations T120 200 800 Step size αt0.01 0.04 0.003 Random seed 777Jitter ϵ000
> λ-sweep —yes —

Remark 4 (Point-to-point special case) . With a single rate-bearing user, K = 1 , a rate function reduces to one unconditional mutual information I(VX ; VY ) and the framework degenerates to the exact information-gradient optimization of [ 10 ]; the conditional-MI objective (9) is its multi-terminal generalization. V. NUMERICAL RESULTS 

We demonstrate the framework with three experiments, each on a fixed linear Gaussian DAG, the deterministic setting of Section IV. Each optimizes a conditional-MI objective end to end by the projected gradient method, with no problem-specific gradient derivation: every iteration is one K-recursion forward pass and one reverse-mode AD sweep. Table Icollects the numerical parameters used in each experiment. All runs use PyTorch complex128 on CPU, a constant projected-gradient step size, and Frobenius-ball projection by uniform rescaling; no Cholesky jitter is activated, since the support covariances stay well-conditioned in double pre-cision. The random seed for Section V-C fixes the single network instance used throughout—its layered inter-layer edge set and the per-edge i.i.d. CN (0 , 1) channels, instantiated once and held fixed. The λ-sweep of Section V-B uses 

λ ∈ { 0, 0.1, 0.25 , 0.5, 0.75 , 1, 1.25 , 1.5, 2, 3, 5} with 10 multi-start restarts per λ (one warm start from the previous λ and nine random complex-Gaussian initial points rescaled to ∥F ∥2 

> F

= P ). The numerical implementation underlying these experiments (the K-recursion forward pass, the sub-block Schur-complement evaluator of Proposition 1, the projected-gradient loop, and the PyTorch autograd interface) is available as the open-source library cmi-dag at https://github.com/wadayama/cmi-dag; its symbolic companion symbolic-dag , which derives the same conditional-MI quantities and their Wirtinger gradients in closed form and cross-validates them against the numerical evaluator, is described in Appendix C. 

A. Rate-Region Maximization 

The first experiment enlarges the achievable rate region of the two-user MIMO MAC of Example 1. 

Setup. The channel is one fixed realization of a two-user MAC with d = 4 antennas per transmitter and at the receiver, i.i.d. CN (0 , 1) entries, and receiver noise σ2 = 1 . The design parameter is the precoder pair (F1, F2), constrained to the shared total-power ball ∥F1∥2

> F

+∥F2∥2 

> F

≤ P with P = 8 . Writing 

I1, I 2, I 12 for the three pentagon facets of Example 1, the objective is the linear conditional-MI objective (10) 

U (η) = I1 + I2 + I12 ,

whose positive-weight maximization encourages simultaneous enlargement of the three MAC facets of the rate region (15) .We maximize U by the projected gradient method (14) from the uniform precoders Fk = Id (no precoding, equal power, already on the budget boundary), with a constant step size; projection onto the total-power ball is closed-form. 

Results. Figure 2 reports the outcome. Panel (a) draws the MAC rate-region pentagon at five iterations: in this realization all three facets increase monotonically along the trajectory, so the rate region expands outward from the unprecoded region at iteration 0 to the optimized one at iteration 120 .Panel (b) shows U rising smoothly from 20 .05 to 22 .60 nats and converging within about 120 iterations. The facets grow from 

(I1, I 2, I 12 ) = (6 .30 , 4.93 , 8.82) to (7 .33 , 5.16 , 10 .11) nats, and the rate-region pentagon area 2 increases by a factor 1.24 . As an external benchmark, waterfilling on the stacked channel 

[H1 H2] [3] under the same total power P yields the coopera-tive MAC sum-capacity Ccoop = 11 .32 nats, an upper bound on 

I12 since cooperation removes the MAC’s independent-encoder restriction; the optimized facet I12 = 10 .11 attains 89% of this bound, leaving a 1.21 -nat residual gap. 

Discussion. The total power stays at P throughout (the uniform initialization already lies on the budget boundary), so the entire gain is due to precoder shaping : at an unchanged power budget, the framework finds the precoders that best match the two users to the fixed channel. No problem-specific gradient was derived; the objective U was simply specified, and its Wirtinger gradient ∇η∗ U was returned by one reverse-mode AD sweep through the shared K-recursion graph at each iteration. 

B. Secure Precoding 

The second experiment optimizes a sign-indefinite 

conditional-MI objective (a secrecy rate) on a MIMO wiretap channel. 

Setup. A transmitter X sends to a legitimate receiver Y

while an eavesdropper Z observes the same transmission, a linear Gaussian DAG with edges X → Y and X → Z. The channels are one fixed realization with d = 4 antennas at every terminal (the eavesdropper is not assumed weaker), i.i.d. 

CN (0 , 1) entries, receiver noise σ2 = 1 . The design parameter is the precoder F , constrained to the Frobenius ball ∥F ∥2 

> F

≤ P

with P = 8 . The objective is the secrecy rate 

U (η) = I(VX ; VY ) − I(VX ; VZ ),

a conditional-MI objective (9) whose linear Φ is sign-indefinite :the negative weight on the eavesdropper’s information is a leakage penalty. We maximize U by the projected gradient method (14) from the uniform precoder F = Id.

Results. Figure 3 reports the outcome. Panel (a) tracks the two mutual informations along the iterations: I(VX ; VY )

moves from 8.23 to 5.74 nats, while I(VX ; VZ ) drops more sharply from 6.72 to 2.06 nats (a 69% reduction). Panel (b) shows the resulting secrecy rate climbing from 1.51 to 3.67 

nats, a factor of 2.43 . Panel (c) extends the optimization to a 

Lagrangian sweep over λ ≥ 0 in Uλ = I(VX ; VY )−λ I (VX ; VZ ),with 10 multi-start restarts per λ (one warm-start from the                                   

> 2For a two-user MAC pentagon {(R1, R 2)∈R2+:R1≤I1, R 2≤I2, R 1+
> R2≤I12 }in the regime max( I1, I 2)≤I12 ≤I1+I2(satisfied along the entire trajectory here), the area is I1I2−12(I1+I2−I12 )2.01234567
> R1(nats) 012345
> R 2 (nats)

(a) rate region along optimization iter 0 iter 10 iter 25 iter 55 iter 120       

> 020 40 60 80 100 120 projected-gradient iteration 20.0 20.5 21.0 21.5 22.0 22.5
> U = I1 + I2 + I12  (nats)

(b) objective             

> Fig. 2. Rate-region maximization on a fixed two-user MIMO MAC ( d= 4 ,shared power budget P= 8 ). The precoders are optimized to maximize the linear conditional-MI objective U=I1+I2+I12 by the projected gradient method. (a) the MAC rate-region pentagon at selected iterations, expanding outward as the precoders are optimized; (b) the objective Uversus projected-gradient iteration.

previous λ and nine random complex-Gaussian inits), keeping the candidate of highest Uλ as the local stationary point at that λ. The resulting curve is an empirical leakage-rate Pareto curve produced by the proposed local optimization procedure; consistently with Section IV-D 2, it should be read as a set of locally supported Pareto-stationary points along the leakage-rate trade-off rather than as the global frontier max {I(VX ; VY ) : 

I(VX ; VZ ) ≤ R}. The classical secrecy rate ( λ = 1 , the star marker) is a single point of this curve. 

Discussion. Both mutual informations decrease as the precoder restructures, but I(VX ; VZ ) drops far more steeply, so the secrecy rate I(VX ; VY )−I(VX ; VZ ) more than doubles even though I(VX ; VY ) is partially traded away: the precoder reallocates transmit power toward modes with a favorable legitimate/eavesdropper gain tradeoff. Panel (c) puts this single operating point in the broader context of a constraint-side use of conditional MI: for any prescribed leakage budget R, the locally optimized legitimate rate produced by the procedure is read off the empirical Pareto curve at I(VX ; VZ ) = R via the Lagrangian relaxation of Section IV-B , solved by the projected-gradient update of Section IV-D 2. As in Section V-A , no gradient was derived by hand: only the scalar Φ changed, here to 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 projected-gradient iteration 2468mutual information (nats)  (a) legitimate vs eavesdropper ( λ = 1 )            

> I(X;Y)(legitimate)
> I(X;Z)(eavesdropper) 025 50 75 100 125 150 175 200

projected-gradient iteration 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 secrecy rate  I(X; Y) − I(X; Z) (nats) 

(b) secrecy rate ( λ = 1 )0 2 4 6 8

I(X; Z) (leakage, nats) 02468

> I(X; Y) (legitimate, nats)

(c) leakage-rate Pareto ( λ-sweep)                                      

> λ= 1 (classical secrecy rate)
> I(X;Y) = I(X;Z)Fig. 3. Secure precoding on a fixed MIMO wiretap channel ( d= 4 antennas at every terminal, power budget P= 8 ). Panels (a), (b): the precoder maximizes the secrecy rate I(VX;VY)−I(VX;VZ)(λ= 1 ) by the projected gradient method; both informations decrease as the precoder restructures, but the eavesdropper’s information drops more steeply, so the secrecy rate more than doubles. Panel (c): empirical leakage-rate Pareto curve traced by a Lagrangian sweep Uλ=
> I(VX;VY)−λ I (VX;VZ)with 10 multi-start restarts per λ(locally supported Pareto-stationary points; Section IV-D 2); the star marks the λ= 1 point of the sweep, the classical secrecy-rate optimization shown in panels (a), (b).

the λ-parameterized sign-indefinite linear form, with the same single-line K-recursion graph driving every λ. Sections V-A and V-B together exercise the conditional-MI objective class of Section IV across positive-weight, sign-indefinite, and constraint-side objectives. 

C. Application to a Multi-Hop MAC Network 

The third experiment takes the rate-region objective of Sec-tion V-A from the canonical single-hop MAC to a larger 

multi-hop network, illustrating that the same procedure applies without modification to a nontrivial topology. 

Setup. The DAG is a given layered Gaussian multiple-access network: two sources s1, s 2, three relay layers of three nodes each, and a single sink t (M = 12 nodes and 19 edges, with d = 4 per node), with a fixed set of inter-layer edges (Figure 4(a)). The topology is given; only the per-edge channels are random, each a fixed i.i.d. CN (0 , 1) realization drawn once from a fixed seed. The two sources emit isotropic signals, and each of the nine relay nodes carries a controllable processing matrix Fi. All relay matrices share one global total-power budget P 

> i

∥Fi∥2 

> F

≤ P with P = 36 . The objective is the MAC rate-region facet sum 

U (η) = I(Vs1 ; Vt | Vs2 )

| {z }

> I1

+ I(Vs2 ; Vt | Vs1 )

| {z }

> I2

+ I(Vs1 , V s2 ; Vt)

| {z }

> I12

,

the same linear conditional-MI objective as Section V-A (the two single-user facets I1, I 2 are conditional mutual informa-tions, I12 the joint sum-rate facet), now on a multi-hop network with no simple topology-specific closed-form optimizer. We maximize U by the projected gradient method (14) from the uniform allocation (identity processing at every relay, equal power; P = ( M −3) d places this on the budget boundary). 

Results. Figure 4 reports the outcome. Panel (a) draws the multi-hop MAC network, each relay node shaded by its optimized power ∥Fi∥2 

> F

, a non-uniform, network-wide alloca-tion. Panel (b) shows the objective and the three facets versus iteration: U rises from 10 .44 to 18 .62 nats, a factor of 1.78 ,and converges; in this realization all three facets also increase, 

(I1, I 2, I 12 ) from (3 .64 , 1.80 , 5.00) to (6 .59 , 2.98 , 9.05) nats, so the achievable rate region expands outward. 

Discussion. A multi-hop network of this size has no simple topology-specific closed-form optimizer or hand-derived facet gradient. Specifying the facet sum U is enough: one reverse-mode AD sweep through the M -node K-recursion graph returns the Wirtinger gradient with respect to all nine relay matrices jointly, and projection onto the shared budget carries the network-wide power allocation. Whereas Section V-A optimizes this rate-region objective on the canonical single-hop MAC, here the same objective applies without modification to a multi-hop multi-terminal network of M = 12 nodes and 19 edges, illustrating that the framework reaches linear Gaussian DAGs of nontrivial size and topology with no new derivation. VI. CONCLUSION 

We presented a differentiable framework for conditional-mutual-information design over linear Gaussian DAGs. Its analytic core (Proposition 1) expresses any conditional mutual information on the DAG as a log-determinant difference of sub-block Schur complements of the support covariance, assembled by a single K-recursion forward pass. On the positive-definite Gaussian-DAG regime considered here (with the diagonal-jitter regularization of Remark 3 in numerical implementations), every differentiable function of conditional mutual informations (weighted rate objectives, secrecy or leakage objectives, rate-region functions, and smooth non-linear surrogates such as 0 1 2 3 4layer      

> source s2
> source s1
> sink t

(a) multi-hop MAC network 0 200 400 600 projected-gradient iteration 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 nats 

(b) optimization trace                                                     

> I1=I(Vs1;Vt∣Vs2)
> I2=I(Vs2;Vt∣Vs1)
> I12 =I(Vs1,Vs2;Vt)
> objective U=I1+I2+I12
> 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 node power  ‖F i ‖ 2
> FFig. 4. Rate-region maximization on a fixed multi-hop Gaussian MAC network (M= 12 nodes, 19 edges, d= 4 per node, shared power budget P= 36 ). Nine relay processing matrices are optimized jointly to maximize the facet sum U=I1+I2+I12 by the projected gradient method. (a) the MAC network (two sources at the left, three relay layers, one sink at the right; edges are directed left to right, reflecting the DAG topology), each relay shaded by its optimized power ∥Fi∥2
> F; (b) the objective Uand the three facets I1, I 2, I 12
> versus projected-gradient iteration.

outage approximations) is an end-to-end differentiable function of the design parameters and amenable to projected-gradient optimization. The main practical consequence is that the user specifies the DAG and the CMI-based scalar objective, while the gradient computation is delegated to the shared K-recursion / Wirtinger AD graph, with no problem-specific gradient derivation. We demonstrated the framework on three experiments that together cover positive-weight rate-region objectives, sign-indefinite secrecy objectives with a Lagrangian leakage sweep, and shared relay-matrix optimization on a nontrivial multi-hop DAG, all by the projected gradient method; the wiretap Lagrangian sweep further illustrates the constraint-side use of conditional MI. Two complementary directions follow naturally. (i) Within the present wireless/network optimization scope: the com-posite sigmoid surrogate of rate-region outage, its stochastic optimization under statistical and instantaneous CSI, and applications to broader multi-terminal channels beyond the MAC and wiretap settings explored here. (ii) Beyond CMI, as an information primitive: the same K-recursion graph supports differentiable conditional differential entropy as a one-Schur, one-log-det specialization (Appendix B), opening Bayesian experimental design, distributed source coding, and Gaussian process innovation rates, which are treated in a follow-up paper. More broadly, the rich rate-region results of multi-terminal information theory have not always translated naturally into the gradient-based workflows of modern wireless-system design. By rendering any combination of conditional mutual informations end-to-end differentiable on a shared K-recursion graph, we hope the present framework offers a practical bridge between the rate-function calculus of multi-terminal information theory and physical-layer design as differentiable programming. APPENDIX AMULTI -T ERMINAL RATE -R EGION EXAMPLES 

This appendix collects concrete instances of the abstract forms (9) and (10) drawn from multi-terminal information theory: the rate-function facets of standard rate regions (a linear instance of (10) ), the composite sigmoid surrogate of rate-region outage (a non-linear instance of (9) ), and a worked two-user MAC example. For K user rates R = ( R1, . . . , R K ), with the coding architecture, auxiliary-variable structure, and any time-sharing choice fixed, the achievable region at design η is an intersection of finitely many log det inequalities [1], [2], 

Rach (η) = 

n

R ∈ RK 

> +

: X

> k∈T

Rk ≤ fT (η), ∀T ∈ S 

o

, (15) indexed by a family S ⊆ 2[K]\{∅} , each rate function fT being itself a linear conditional-MI objective (10), 

fT (η) = 

> NT

X

> n=1

αT,n I(VAT ,n ; VBT ,n | VCT ,n ). (16) The two-user multiple-access pentagon is the case NT = 1 ,

fT = I(VXT ; VY | VXT c ) [ 5]; the Gaussian broadcast region with dirty-paper coding [ 9], the Han–Kobayashi inner bound for the interference channel [ 7], and decode-/compress-and-forward relay inner bounds [ 8 ] likewise admit the form (15) –(16) once the coding order, auxiliary-variable structure, time-sharing choice, and Gaussian linear parametrization are fixed, the latter two with NT ≥ 2 and coefficients αT,n of either sign. A notable non-linear instance of (9) is built directly from these rate functions. At an operating point R, the achievability indicator 1{R ∈ R ach (η)} factors as Q  

> T∈S

1{P 

> k∈T

Rk ≤

fT (η)}; smoothing each factor by a temperature-τ sigmoid 

στ yields the composite sigmoid surrogate of the rate-region outage indicator, 

bρτ (η) = 1 −Y 

> T∈S

στ



fT (η)−X

> k∈T

Rk



, (17) whose Φ is the non-linear sigmoid-product composition and whose auxiliary constants are the target rates R and the temperature τ . In a fading environment, with the channel real-ization H made an explicit random argument, the expectation EH [bρτ (η, H)] is a differentiable proxy for the rate-region outage probability Pr H [R /∈ R ach (η, H)] .

Example 1 (Two-user multiple-access channel) . Two rate-bearing users with input roots X1, X 2 feed a single re-ceiver node Y . Three conditional mutual informations on this DAG generate the standard design objectives, namely the interference-free user rates I1 ≜ I(VX1 ; VY | VX2 ) and 

I2 ≜ I(VX2 ; VY | VX1 ), and the sum information I12 ≜

I(VX1 , V X2 ; VY ): (i) sum throughput is U = I12 ; (ii) aweighted sum-rate U = α1I1 + α2I2 is a linear conditional-MI objective (10) ; (iii) proportional fairness U = log I1+log I2

is a non-linear one (9) ; (iv) at an operating point (R1, R 2) the composite surrogate (17) of the multiple-access pentagon is 

bρτ = 1 −στ (I1−R1) στ (I2−R2) στ (I12 −R1−R2). All four are read off the one K-recursion graph, differing only in the node subsets and in Φ, and optimized by the single update (14). APPENDIX BCONDITIONAL DIFFERENTIAL ENTROPY AS A PIPELINE 

SPECIALIZATION 

The conditional-MI evaluator of Proposition 1 specializes naturally to the conditional differential entropy. For nonempty 

A ⊆ V and a (possibly empty) disjoint C ⊆ V , set S = A∪C

and assume ΣS,S ≻ 0 as in Proposition 1. The conditional covariance ΣA|C of VA given VC , defined by the Schur complement of (7) (reducing to ΣA,A for C = ∅), yields the conditional differential entropy 

h(VA | VC ) = log det( πe ΣA|C ) = log det ΣA|C +dA log( πe ),

(18) where dA = P 

> a∈A

da is the total dimension of VA. Since dA

is fixed by the support of A and πe is a global constant, the additive term dA log( πe ) is independent of the design parameter 

η; the entropy gradient consequently reduces to a pure log-determinant gradient, 

∇η∗ h(VA | VC ) = ∇η∗ log det ΣA|C , (19) so the constant may be dropped throughout any gradient-based design objective involving h.The construction is the first half of (8) : one block extrac-tion, one Schur complement, and one log-determinant. The conditional MI of Proposition 1 is recovered as the entropy chain rule 

I(VA; VB | VC ) = h(VA | VC )−h(VA | VBC ), (20) in which the constant dA log( πe ) cancels exactly. The conditional-entropy primitive is of independent interest in problems where the MI representation does not collapse to fewer quantities and the entropy itself enters the formulation: Bayesian experimental design and sensor placement (posterior covariance-volume minimization via log det ΣA|C ); Gaussian Slepian–Wolf type distributed source coding (rate regions in terms of conditional entropies); innovation rates of Gaussian processes on a DAG (Kalman residual entropy); privacy and information-leakage formulations where input distributions are co-designed (so that h(VX ) itself is a variable); and maximum-entropy design under structural constraints. These applications fit the same K-recursion / Wirtinger AD machinery through the specialization (18) but are outside the scope of the present paper and are left to a follow-up work. APPENDIX CSYMBOLIC COMPANION : C LOSED -F ORM CMI AND 

WIRTINGER GRADIENTS 

The K-recursion and the conditional-MI construction of this paper are purely linear-algebraic and therefore admit an exact 

symbolic treatment. We have implemented this in a small open-source companion library, symbolic-dag , which shares the model and conventions of Section II-B but carries the edge gains and noise covariances as opaque matrix symbols . Its role is analysis rather than optimization: while the numerical pipeline of Sections III and V searches the design space, the symbolic layer supplies closed-form expressions, optimality conditions, and exact conditional-independence identities. Kept symbolic, the conditional mutual information (8) admits the equivalent symmetric rewriting 

I(VA; VB | VC ) =log det ΣA|C +log det ΣB|C

−log det ΣAB |C , (21) which is returned as a closed form for an arbitrary disjoint triple (VA, V B , V C ) whose size is independent of the node dimension (the scalar case is its 1×1 specialization), together with its Wirtinger gradient ∂I/∂ F H with respect to any gain or precoder F .For the MIMO precoder model VY = HF VX0 +VX1 +VN ,for instance, the library returns the closed-form gradient 

∂∂F H I(VX0 ; VY | VX1 ) = HH R+HF Σ0F HHH−1HF Σ0,

(22) for any precoder F , with no per-topology hand calculation. Conditional independence is similarly obtained as an exact matrix identity: the cross conditional covariance ΣAB |C reduces to the zero matrix for all dimensions at once, supporting matrix-level d-separation proofs. The central technical point is that a general-purpose computer-algebra system does not, out of the box, operate at this matrix layer: in the SymPy base layer used here, covariance symbols carry no Hermitian structure, the block-determinant identities that collapse a conditional-MI log-determinant are not applied, and the native matrix differentiation of log det of an opaque matrix symbol returns the zero matrix. 

symbolic-dag therefore supplies two small, rule-based engines. The first is a simplification engine : a strategic (phased) rewriter over a rule set of block identities (Schur complement, Sylvester’s determinant identity, the matrix-determinant lemma, and Woodbury) together with structural assumptions (Hermitian symmetry ΣH → Σ, source independence). A fixed rule 

ordering is essential because the rules are not confluent: a Woodbury expansion, for example, can pre-empt an inverse cancellation that a d-separation proof needs. This engine is what reduces ΣAB |C to the zero matrix in the identity quoted above. The second is a Wirtinger differentiation engine , the matrix-calculus analogue, applying d log det M = tr( M −1dM ) and extracting the coefficient of dF H to return the closed-form gradient ∂I/∂ F H for any gain or precoder F , as in (22). Both engines keep every quantity block-symbolic (no expansion into scalar entries), so the results stay dimension-independent. Compound objects such as conditional covariances and Schur complements are stored as named intermediate symbols and resolved lazily on demand, so each engine operates on a compact set of high-level matrix terms rather than on a fully expanded expression tree. The engines are themselves implemented as a thin matrix-aware layer over a general-purpose symbolic-computation system (SymPy in the present implementation), with symbolic-dag supplying the block-identity rule sets, the phased ordering, and the Wirtinger calculus discipline that the underlying CAS lacks. Every symbolic result is cross-validated against the numer-ical CMI evaluator of Proposition 1 and its PyTorch autograd, and symbolic-dag also renders its closed forms as L ATEXfor the analyst. The library is available at https://github.com/ wadayama/symbolic-dag, together with its verification suite and documentation. REFERENCES [1] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory , 2nd ed. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Interscience, 2006. [2] A. El Gamal and Y.-H. Kim, Network Information Theory . Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2011. [3] ˙I. E. Telatar, “Capacity of multi-antenna Gaussian channels,” Eur. Trans. Telecommun. , vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 585–595, Nov. 1999. [4] D. P. Palomar and S. Verd ´u, “Gradient of mutual information in linear vector Gaussian channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 141–154, Jan. 2006. [5] D. N. C. Tse and S. V. Hanly, “Multiaccess fading channels—Part I: Polymatroid structure, optimal resource allocation, and throughput capacities,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 44, no. 7, pp. 2796–2815, Nov. 1998. [6] A. Paszke et al. , “PyTorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library,” in Proc. NeurIPS , 2019, pp. 8024–8035. [7] T. S. Han and K. Kobayashi, “A new achievable rate region for the interference channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 49–60, Jan. 1981. [8] T. M. Cover and A. A. El Gamal, “Capacity theorems for the relay channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 572–584, Sep. 1979. [9] G. Caire and S. Shamai (Shitz), “On the achievable throughput of a multiantenna Gaussian broadcast channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory ,vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 1691–1706, Jul. 2003. [10] T. Wadayama and S. Na, “Mutual information optimization via K-recursion and automatic differentiation for linear Gaussian wireless networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.06982 , Jun. 2026. [11] T. Wadayama, “Information gradient for directed acyclic graphs: A score-based framework for end-to-end mutual information maximization,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.01789 , Jan. 2026. [12] M. I. Belghazi et al. , “Mutual information neural estimation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML) , 2018, pp. 531–540. [13] A. van den Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with contrastive predictive coding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748 , Jul. 2018. [14] A. G. Baydin, B. A. Pearlmutter, A. A. Radul, and J. M. Siskind, “Automatic differentiation in machine learning: A survey,” J. Mach. Learn. Res. , vol. 18, pp. 1–43, 2018. [15] P. J. Schreier and L. L. Scharf, Statistical Signal Processing of Complex-Valued Data: The Theory of Improper and Noncircular Signals .Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2010. [16] R. D. Shachter and C. R. Kenley, “Gaussian influence diagrams,” Manage. Sci. , vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 527–550, May 1989. [17] D. Geiger and D. Heckerman, “Learning Gaussian networks,” in Proc. 10th Conf. Uncertainty Artif. Intell. (UAI) , 1994, pp. 235–243. [18] S. Sullivant, K. Talaska, and J. Draisma, “Trek separation for Gaussian graphical models,” Ann. Statist. , vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 1665–1685, 2010.